SIMULATION OF CLINICAL SKILLS:
A PRACTICAL GUIDE

Janja Tar!uković, Erika Šuper-Petrinjac (editors) et al.
SIMULATION OF CLINICAL SKILLS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE
PUBLISHER
University of Rijeka, Faculty of Medicine
EDITORS
Assist. Prof. Janja Tar!uković, MD, PhD, DESAIC
Erika Šuper-Petrinjac, MD, DESAIC
LECTOR
Dunja Zori!ić, prof.
REVIEWERS
Assoc. Prof. Alen Protić, MD, PhD
Prof. Višnja Nesek Adam, MD, PhD
GRAPHIC DESIGN
Leo Kirin!ić, Josipa Tadić (Layout Design & Art Direction)
Na%a Ristović (Content Placement)
Mia Radić (Table Design)
Sara Duman!ić (Graphic Preparation of Illustrations)
PHOTOGRAPHY
Ivan Buvinić
PRINT
Printshop Name d.o.o
ISBN
978-953-8341-46-5

AUTHORS
Gordana Ba!ić, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and specialist in cardiology
Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Clinic of Cardiovascular Diseases, Clinical Hospital
Centre Rijeka, Croatia

Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia

Berislav Barbalić, MD, EDRA, teaching assistant
(nominal title) and specialist in anaesthesiology,
resuscitation, and intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia

Nataša Mavrinac, MD, teaching assistant (nominal
title) and specialist in emergency medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Emergency Department, Clinical Hospital Centre
Rijeka, Croatia

Katarina Bo&ić, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and resident in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Matej Bura, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Ivana Jurin!ić, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Danijel Kne&ević, MD, teaching assistant and
specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Mate Lerga, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and specialist in emergency medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Emergency Department, Clinical Hospital Centre
Rijeka, Croatia
Jan Maroević, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and resident in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of

Mate Matešić, MD, specialist in emergency medicine

Marko Milošević, MD, teaching assistant (nominal
title) and specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation,
and intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Marinka Oto!an, MD, teaching assistant (nominal
title) and specialist in emergency medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Emergency Department, Clinical Hospital Centre
Rijeka, Croatia
Ana Pi!uljan, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Ivan Ševeljević, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title)
and resident in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care
and Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka,
Croatia
Erika Šuper-Petrinjac, MD, DESAIC, teaching
assistant and specialist in anaesthesiology,
resuscitation, and intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and
Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Croatia
Petra Šverko Zinaić, MD, teaching assistant (nominal
title) and specialist in emergency medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Emergency Department, Clinical Hospital Centre
Rijeka, Croatia

Assist. Prof. Janja Tar!uković, MD, PhD, DESAIC,
specialist in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and
intensive care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and
Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Croatia
Lara Valen!ić Seršić, MD, teaching assistant and
resident in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and intensive
care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and
Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Croatia
Ivan Vuksan, MD, teaching assistant (nominal title) and
resident in anaesthesiology, resuscitation, and intensive
care medicine
Department of Anaesthesiology, Resuscitation,
Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and
Pain Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Croatia

LIST OF ABBREVATIONS
ABCDE

Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability,
Exposure and Environment
ABG
Arterial blood gases
ACS
Acute coronary syndrome
ACEi
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
AF
Atrial fibrillation and flutter
ALI
Acute lung injury
ALS
Advanced Life Support
ARB
Angiotensin II receptor antagonist
ARDS
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
AV
Atrioventricular
AVPU
Alert, Voice, Pain, Unresponsive
BE
Base excess
BNP
B-type natriuretic peptide
BP
Blood pressure
CBC
Complete blood count
CHF
Chronic heart failure
CMV
Controlled mechanical ventilation
CNS
Central nervous system
CO
Cardiac output
COPD
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CPAP
Continuous positive airway pressure
CPP
Cerebral perfusion pressure
CPR
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CRP
C-reactive protein
CRT
Capillary refill time
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
CT
Computed tomography
CVC
Central venous catheter
DO'
Oxygen delivery
ECF
Extracellular fluid
ECG
Electrocardiogram
EEG
Electroencephalogram
ERC
European Resuscitation Council
ETC
European Trauma Course
ETT
Endotracheal tube
EtCO'
End-expiratory carbon dioxide
EWS
Early Warning Score
FAST
The Focused Assessment with
Sonography in Trauma ultrasound
protocol
FiO'
Fraction of inspired oxygen
G
Gauge
GCS
Glasgow Coma Scale
Hb
Haemoglobin
HES
Hydroxyethyl starch
IBW
Ideal body weight
ICP
Intracranial pressure
IM
Intramuscular
IO
Intraosseous
ITLS
International Trauma Life Support
IV
Intravenous
LAD
The anterior descending branch of the
left coronary artery
LBBB
Left bundle branch block
LCx
The circumflex branch of the left
coronary artery
LMA
Laryngeal mask
LVEDP
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
MAP
Mean arterial pressure
MOI
Mechanism of injury
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
NGT
Nasogastric tube
NIV
Noninvasive ventilation
NSAIDs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSTE-ACS Non-ST-segment elevation acute
coronary syndrome

NSTEMI
PaCO'
PaO'
PAO'
PCI
PE
PEA
PEEP
PEF
PS
PSVT
PTX
pVT
RCA
SAMPLE
SaO'
SGA
SIADH
SID
SIMV
SOFA
SpO'
STE-ACS
STEMI
SVT
TBI
TBSA
VF
VT
WOB
WPW
4H

4T

Non-ST-segment-elevation
myocardial infarction
Carbon dioxide partial pressure in
arterial blood
Oxygen partial pressure in arterial
blood
Oxygen partial pressure in the alveoli
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Pulmonary embolism
Pulseless electrical activity
Positive end-expiratory pressure
Peak expiratory flow
Pressure support
Paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia
Pneumothorax
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia
The right coronary artery
Symptoms, Allergies, Medications,
Past medical history, Last oral intake,
Events leading to the incident
Arterial blood oxygen saturation
Supraglotttic airway device
Syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion
Strong ion difference
Synchronised intermittent mandatory
ventilation
Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment score
Peripheral blood oxygen saturation
ST-segment elevation acute coronary
syndrome
ST-segment-elevation myocardial
infarction
Supraventricular tachycardia
Traumatic brain injury
Total body surface area
Ventricular fibrillation
Ventricular tachycardia
Work of breathing
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
hypoxia, hypovolaemia,
hyperkalaemia, hypokalaemia and
metabolic disorders, hypothermia
(reversible causes of death)
tension pneumothorax, tamponade,
thrombosis, toxic agents (reversible
causes of death)

PART !: DETERIORATING PATIENT
1.1.
Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE) (15)
1.2.
Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies (29)
1.2.1.
The conduction system of the heart and the normal cardiac cycle on the
ECG (29)
1.2.2.
ECG monitoring (30)
1.2.3.
Interpretation of 12-lead ECG (34)
1.2.4.
St-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) on ECG (36)
1.3.
Intravascular and intraosseous access (43)
1.3.1.
Intravascular access (43)
1.3.2.
Intraosseous access (45)
1.4.
Advanced life support (ALS) algorithm (51)
1.4.1.
Management of shockable rhythms (pVT, VF) (52)
1.4.2.
Treatment of non-shockable rhythms (PEA, asystole) (53)
PART 2: CARDIAC EMERGENCIES
2.1.
Initial assessment and management of a patient with acute coronary
syndrome (59)
2.1.1.
Introduction (59)
2.1.2.
Diagnosis (59)
2.1.3.
Management of acute coronary syndrome (61)
2.2.
Initial assessment and management of a patient with cardiac
arrhythmia (67)
2.2.1.
Introduction (67)
2.2.2.
Classification of arrhythmias (67)
2.2.3.
Initial approach to the patient with a cardiac arrhythmia (68)
2.2.4.
Treatment (69)
PART 3: RESPIRATORY EMERGENCIES
3.1.
Acute respiratory failure (81)
3.1.1.
Introduction (81)
3.2.
Oxygen therapy and pulse oximetry (87)
3.3.
Arterial blood gases (ABGs) (91)
3.4.
Anaphylaxis (97)
3.4.1.
Initial assessment (97)
3.4.2.
Treatment (99)
3.5.
Acute bronchospasm (103)
3.5.1.
Asthma (103)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (106)
3.5.2.
3.6.
Pulmonary oedema (113)
3.6.1.
Initial patient assessment: ABCDE + SAMPLE (113)
Mechanical ventilation snippets (119)
3.7.
PART4: SUDDEN NEUROLOGICAL DETERIORATION
Sudden neurological deterioration (127)
4.1.
4.1.1.
Causes of sudden neurological deterioration and potential
differential diagnosis (127)

4.1.2.
4.2.
4.2.1.
4.2.2.
4.2.3.
4.3.
4.3.1.
4.3.2.

Initial patient assessment and management: ABCDE + SAMPLE
Seizures (135)
Introduction (135)
Treatment (136)
Initial patient care: ABCDE + SAMPLE (137)
Acute poisoning (141)
Introduction (141)
Initial patient assessment: ABCDE + SAMPLE (141)

PART %: SEPSIS
5.1.
Sepsis and septic shock (147)
5.1.1.
Introduction (147)
5.1.2.
Initial management: ABCDE + SAMPLE

(128)

(148)

PART &: BLOOD, FLUIDS AND ELECTROLYTES
6.1.
Intravenous fluids (155)
6.1.1.
Introduction (155)
6.1.2.
Basal metabolism (156)
6.1.3.
Type and selection of intravenous fluid (156)
6.2.
Management of electrolyte disorders (161)
6.2.1.
Hypokalaemia and hyperkalaemia (161)
6.2.2.
Other electrolyte disorders (167)
6.2.3.
Initial patient assessment (169)
6.2.4.
Patient history according to the sample approach (170)
6.3.
Haemorrhage and haemorrhagic shock (173)
6.3.1.
Classification of bleeding (175)
6.3.2.
Causes of severe bleeding (176)
6.3.3.
Initial patient assessment: ABCDE + SAMPLE (176)
PART ': INJURIES
7.1.
Trauma assessment and management (183)
7.1.1.
Introduction (183)
7.1.2.
Management of trauma patients (184)
7.1.3.
Mechanism of injury (184)
7.1.4.
Initial assessment (187)
7.1.5.
Rapid trauma survey (189)
7.1.6.
Immobilisation (192)
7.1.7.
ETC approach to trauma patients (197)
7.1.8.
Specific injuries (197)
7.1.9.
Pelvic injuries (202)
7.2.
Burns (205)
7.2.1.
Introduction (205)
7.2.2.
Initial patient assessment and management: ABCDE + SAMPLE

(206)

This book stands in the space between deterioration and decision —
where knowledge becomes the path from chaos to care.

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

2—38

13—56

14
Part 1: Deteriorating patient

Katarina Bo*i+, Matej Bura
!. !. INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF ACUTELY ILL PATIENTS
(ABCDE AND SAMPLE)

An acutely ill patient is one with an immediate threat of deterioration of vital functions, such as the cardiovascular, respiratory, and
neurological systems, with a risk for subsequent cardiac arrest.
This can result from their initial illness or a combination of chronic
comorbidities and an acute state. Handling these patients requires
standardised, systematic, and simple initial assessment and management. Simplified and focused examinations bring enough information about the patient’s current status and need for therapeutic
interventions. The accidental or deliberate omission of one or more
vital parameters may delay recognition of the problem and potentially
further worsen the patient’s condition.
With a structured examination, in most situations, we obtain
enough information to form a differential diagnosis and plan for the
initial management of the acutely ill patient. One of the tools for standardised and systematic initial patient assessment is the ABCDE
algorithm. It consists of five categories, where each letter represents
one category during the assessment. The assessment is performed
in alphabetical order. If a deviation/problem is encountered during the
inspection, immediate therapeutic intervention is performed. In other
words, if there is a problem on “B”, the recommendation is to solve that
problem, stabilise it if possible, and only then move on to “C”. Life—
threatening conditions in patients are most often manifested through
changes in cardiocirculatory, respiratory and neurological systems;
therefore, they have the most important place in the rapid assessment.

15

16

17
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

“A” stands for airway and evaluates problems with airway obstruction. Obstruction can be partial or complete and caused by
various reasons such as decreased tone of soft tissues in the upper
airway, food, blood, gastric content, oedema of the soft tissues of
the tongue, pharynx, and larynx, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and
others. Complete airway obstruction can quickly cause cardiac arrest.
Sometimes after complete airway obstruction, a see—saw phenomenon can be seen in the form of paradoxical inverse movement of the
chest cavity and abdomen. If the respiratory drive is still present, the
diaphragm and intercostal muscles contract and prepare for air to
enter. If there is no inspired air, a reverse movement of the chest and
abdomen can be seen (instead of the regular simultaneous abdomen
and chest movement).
Partial obstruction is a common problem in clinical practice. In
that case, sound phenomena can usually be heard as snoring, gargling, and inspiratory stridor. Depending on which of these are detected, one can estimate an approximate location of obstruction (upper
or lower respiratory tract). A common problem is partial airway obstruction caused by acute deterioration in the level of consciousness.
It is expected that patients with a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 8 or
fewer points don’t have protective reflexes, so protection of the airway
against gastric reflux and regurgitation of content with endotracheal
tube is required in that case!
HOW TO KEEP THE AIRWAY OPEN,
Opening the airway is one of the key points of patient treatment
whatsoever. If airway obstruction is visible, it is necessary to act immediately. One of the basic approaches is the head—tilt chin—lift manoeuvre in its original form, which can be supplemented with adjutant
manoeuvres. The upper hand is put on the patient’s forehead, and the
lower hand pushes the bony part of the mandible until resistance is
felt. If a fracture of the cervical vertebrae is suspected (for example,
fall from height, traffic accident, or jump into a shallow pool or beach),
the manoeuvre should be modified. Instead of head tilt, fixation of the
skull is made with pressure on zygomatic arches on both sides, followed by regular chin lift. If there is suspicion of spinal fracture combined with visible trauma of the facial bones, the head is fixated in the
area of temporal bone bilaterally with regular chin lift movement.
Once the airway is opened, it should be kept that way, which is
achieved with oro— or nasopharyngeal airway or supraglottic (SGA) or
infraglottic devices. Usually, we start with the lowest level device (e.g.,
nasopharyngeal airway) and escalate according to the patient’s state.
Commonly used are the oropharyngeal airway and nasopharyngeal
airway.
The oropharyngeal airway is inserted through the mouth. Its
concave side “slides” along the hard palate. Once the top of the

FIGURE !. Head—tilt chin—lift manoeuvre

18

B

C

FIGURE 2. Supraglottic devices of different sizes: A) nasopharyngeal airways,
B) oropharyngeal airways, C) laryngeal masks.

19
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

A

airway reaches the soft palate, a change of resistance is felt, and the
tube should be rotated by 180° and sunken for the air to freely pass
from outside through the oral cavity and pharynx into the larynx. For
the airway tube to function appropriately, the right size should be
placed in the patient’s oral cavity. The appropriate size is estimated by
placing it in a position in which it stands in the oral cavity, placing the
lower edge at the mandibular angle. Tube of proper size should have
the upper edge at the level of incisors. If the proper size is unavailable, a bigger size is more appropriate. As with every other tube, there
can occur practical problems. Firstly, the tube is near the oropharyngeal aperture and base of the tongue, which are areas with significant
vagal innervation. This can provoke a vomiting reflex if one is still
present in the patient (in that case, the airway must be removed immediately). Secondly, the trauma of the oral cavity and trismus could
make insertion difficult, maybe even impossible.
The nasopharyngeal airway is inserted into the pharynx through
the nasal cavity. It is cut diagonally on its lower edge, and a shorter
margin should be placed medially when inserting. Rotating movements are done by prospering through the lower nasal cavity perpendicularly to the patient’s head. The appropriate size of the airway is
estimated by placing the lower edge on the earlobe, and the upper
edge should be at the nostril opening. Some of the commercially
available nasopharyngeal tubes come with adjustable flange to mark
and secure the airway in optimal depth (for a particular patient) after
the insertion. The nasopharyngeal airway is better tolerated than the
oropharyngeal in patients that still have protective reflexes (pharyngeal, laryngeal, cough reflex). There can be difficulties placing the
airway if there is a nose fracture present. On top of that, if there is a
suspected skull base fracture (Brillen hematoma, otorrhea, rhinorrhoea, mastoid hematoma), it is contraindicated to place nasopharyngeal airway because potentially fractured lamina cribrosa of ethmoidal bone can be additionally damaged by placing the device.
One of the essential supraglottic devices is a laryngeal mask
(LMA). The most commonly used version is i—gel, which got its value
by having thermoplastic elastomers on its lower edge that ensure
better placement on the laryngeal aditus. This provides a better seal
and less probability of aspiration of gastric content into the lungs.
Insertion is made by holding LMA in the hand like a pencil, with the
progression of the mask through the oral cavity. It is useful to push
the soft tissues of the tongue aside to place it more easily. Its upper
edge has a connector that enables bag valve mask placement and
assists ventilation of the patient if needed. ALS algorithm for cardiac
arrest states that LMA is an adequate airway protection device for
providers who are not highly skilled in intubation. However, research
shows that, although it does provide some protection, it does not
completely eliminate the risk of aspiration of gastric content in the
case of regurgitation. Moreover, it can even provoke vomiting if the
vagal reflexes are present or the ventilation is performed under higher

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

D

KEY POINTS:
— Manoeuvres: head-tilt chin-lift + modifications
— Devices: oropharyngeal airway, nasopharyngeal airway, laryngeal mask, endotracheal tube).

C

A

B

FIGURE 3. Oxygen therapy equipment:
A) nasal cannula, B) simple face mask, C) mask with reservoir, D) bag valve mask with reservoir.

The second category is “B”, which stands for the breathing parameters. Firstly, the respiratory rate is assessed. It is measured by observing breathing mechanics in parallel with placing a hand on the lower
part of the patient’s chest for 30 seconds. Normal respiratory rate is
between 10 and 20 breaths per minute (eupnoea). Bradypnoeic patient
(< 10/min) has, despite the appropriate tidal volume, inappropriate exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the lungs, so the patient needs
assisted ventilation (for example, if the patient breaths 6/min, 6 additional ones should be added to have appropriate frequency and, therefore, adequate minute volume). An apnoeic patient requires constant
assisted ventilation. Tachypnoeic patient (> 20/min) has significantly
higher energy expenditure on work of breathing, which eventually leads
to muscle fatigue and use of accessory respiratory muscles (intercostal muscles, muscles of the neck). Normal breathing mechanics also
implies a symmetric movement of both sides of the thorax synchronously with the abdomen. In the case of asymmetric movement, further
examination should be performed to distinguish potential pathology.
Auscultation of the lungs can bring a lot of information that can help
in the clinical examination: inspiratory stridor can point to a problem
in the upper respiratory tract, and inspiratory and expiratory crackles
can point to a problem in the lower respiratory tract. If lung auscultation
shows abnormalities, percussion of the thorax can distinguish whether
air is trapped in the thorax (pneumothorax — hyperresonance) or there
is effusion (dull, flat sound). Lung ultrasound and radiogram are additional points in examination that can help in further diagnosis and are
commonly used in these cases. In the case of tension pneumothorax
(PTX), urgent decompression of the compressed lung is necessary.
Furthermore, pulse oximetry is a vital parameter in ABCDE assessment.
It is a non—invasive measurement of a patient’s peripheral blood oxygen
saturation. In most patients, normal saturation is between 94 and 98%,
while 88—92% is tolerated in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). If there is a lack of oxygen, it can be compensated
with a nasal cannula, simple face mask, or face mask with a reservoir.
The mixture of air that is normally inhaled (fraction of inspired oxygen — FiO') contains 21% of oxygen. The fraction of inspired oxygen can be enriched through nasal cannulas and masks.
The nasal cannula can supplement oxygen through 1—4 L/min flow,
thus increasing the inspiratory fraction to 40%. Face mask supplements 4—10 L/min flow (FiO' 35—60%). Face mask with reservoir

21
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

pressure, with a leak in the oesophagus with subsequent gastric distention. Endotracheal intubation remains the gold standard for airway
protection.

20

22

KEY POINTS:
— respiratory rate, symmetry of chest movement, lung auscultation, pulse oximetry
— supplementation of oxygen: nasal cannula, simple face mask,
face mask with reservoir
— assisted ventilation
“C” stands for circulation. Cardiovascular disturbances are often a
sign of general deterioration in a patient. There are several parameters
included in the “C” assessment: characteristics of a patient’s pulse, blood
pressure, skin colour, capillary refill time, and diuresis. The individual parameter might not sometimes give much information, while the combined
analysis of all the parameters and their trends often paints a good general
picture of the patient’s haemodynamic profile and risk for deterioration
and cardiac arrest. Pulse is characterised by its rate, rhythm, and strength.
Normal heart rate ranges from 60 to 100 beats per minute, while a rate
below 60/min is called bradycardia, and above 100/min is called tachycardia. Bradycardic pulse can sometimes be found in young, healthy individuals without cardiac pathology. A typical example of a completely arrhythmic pulse can be found in patients with atrial fibrillation, a commonly
found pathological rhythm in elderly patients. Heart rhythm and its pathology are explained in more detail in chapter 2.2. Pulse is regularly equally
palpable centrally (e.g., carotid artery) and peripherally (radial artery). If
the pulse strength is weaker on the radial artery, the estimated systolic
blood pressure is less than 80 mmHg (hypotensive state). The focus in the
assessment of skin is on its warmth and wetness. Normal skin is dry and
warm, while in the case of haemodynamic disturbances, it is often clammy,
sweaty, and cold. Pale skin can point to anaemia and/or centralisation of
blood flow. Cyanotic skin can indicate hypoxia, and red and swollen skin
can indicate anaphylaxis. Capillary refill time is a parameter that indicates
the adequacy of peripheral blood flow; as the skin is the organ with the
lowest level of autoregulation, it will also be the first organ from which the
blood will be centralised in the case of reduced cardiac output, e.g., in hypovolaemia. Measurement is performed by applying pressure on the skin
near bony tissue (typically sternum or forehead). If it takes longer than 2
seconds for a distal capillary bed to regain its colour, blood flow through
the skin and other peripheral tissues is insufficient. The longer the capillary refill time, the stronger the centralisation (a typical example is an actively bleeding patient).
Centralisation of blood flow is an adaptive response to haemodynamic disturbance. It consists of vasoconstriction in the “peripheral”
organ system (skin, muscles) in order to preserve adequate blood flow
through vital organs (brain, heart, lungs). Clinically, centralisation is seen
in characteristic manifestations: pale and clammy skin, capillary refill

time (CRT) longer than 2 seconds, and tachycardia. Blood pressure
measurement in these cases might show hypotension with systolic
blood pressure below 90 mmHg.
Besides clinical examination, there are several interventions
that have to be performed during the assessment of the cardiovascular system. An acutely ill patient should be put on continuous electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring. Basic monitoring includes at least
three Einthoven leads: the red one is put on the upper right side of the
thorax, the yellow one is put on the upper left part of the thorax, and
the green electrode is put on the lower left part of the thorax. After
the patient is put on ECG monitoring, the cardiac rhythm strip should
be analysed. Depending on the patient’s medical history and clinical
examination, a 12—lead ECG should be recorded. Placing intravenous
access is one of the basic interventions in acutely ill patients. Once
IV access is placed, blood samples can be analysed, and intravenous
medications can be administered.
KEY POINTS:
—
basic examination: pulse (rate, rhythm, strength), skin
(colour, wetness, warmth), blood pressure, capillary refill time,
diuresis
—
ECG monitoring, IV access.
Short neurological assessment is performed during the “D”
category (disability). State of consciousness, pupillary response, and
blood glucose levels are regularly monitored. Basic quantitative assessment of the state of consciousness is checked through the AVPU
score. “A” stands for an alert patient, “V” represents a patient who
reacts to verbal stimuli (corresponds to somnolence). The patient in
the “P” category does not react to verbal stimuli but reacts to painful
stimuli (corresponds to stupor). “U” stands for patient unresponsive
to any stimuli, which corresponds to coma. AVPU roughly shows categories measured more thoroughly by the GCS, a scoring system
that should be considered if the patient has a primary neurological
disorder. Pupils are typically equally wide and respond to light with
constriction bilaterally. Asymmetry of pupils can imply increased intracranial pressure. In acutely ill patients, bilaterally dilated pupils that
don’t respond to light stimuli imply global cerebral circulation disorder. Hypoglycaemia is one of the most common causes of acutely
deteriorated neurological status, which makes glucose measurement
an essential part of the neurological assessment.
KEY POINTS:
— AVPU scale
— pupillary response, blood glucose measurement.
The last category in the assessment includes exposure and
environment (“E”). It includes the examination of other organ systems

23
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

supplements 10—15 L/min (FiO' 60—95%). Which device to use
depends entirely on the patient’s clinical state, which will be further explained in the chapter about acute respiratory insufficiency.

24

EXAMINATION

B

GOAL

• airway noises
• position of head
• foreign body
• fluid, secretions
• oedema

• open
• suction
• secure
• O-

patent
airway

• look — listen — feel approach
• raspiratory rate and effort
• breath and added sounds
• subcutaneous emphysema
• symmetry of chest movement
• tracheal deviation
• jugular vein distention
• cyanosis

• O- according to SpO• pneumothorax therapy
• inhalation therapy
• ventilation

sufficient
oxygenation
and ventilation

KEY POINTS:
— temperature
— FAST ultrasound, last menstrual cycle.

SpO- - EtCO- – USG – X-ray
- CT
• I.V./I.O. access
• control of bleeding
• massive haemorrhage
protocol
• fluids
• drugs
• transfusion

stabilisation
of circulation

• glucose
• antidotes

D

• AVPU / GCS
• reactivity and symetry of
pupils
• blood glucose level
• basic neurological examination
• posture
• toxicological examination

evaluation of
neurological
state

E

• head to toe examination
• medical history
• temperature
• injuries
• oedemas
• scars
• signs of drug abuse
• skin changes
• signs of infection/sepsis

• identified cause therapy
• thermomanagement
• trauma treatment
• insertion of NGT, IUC

revealing other symptoms
and thermomanagement

C

• heart rate
• blood pressure
• capillary refill timee
• bleeding
• skin colour
• blood samples
• diuresis

previously not included in the examination and a detailed examination of the skin of the whole body in search of further clinical signs
that can be connected to already found pathology. Body temperature
should also be measured. Depending on the symptoms observed,
the examination can include an abdomen examination, rectal examination, neurological orientation examination, FAST (The Focused
Assessment with Sonography in Trauma) ultrasound examination,
and others.

ECG — USG — CT — X—ray

FIGURE 4. ABCDE examination, an overview of possible interventions, and goals (retrieved
from Peran et al. ABCDE cognitive aid tool in patient assessment — development and
validation in a multicenter pilot simulation study. BMC Emergency Medicine 2020; 20: 95.

MEDICAL HISTORY
In order to help with differential diagnosis and decide on the plan for
initial management of the acutely ill patient, target medical history
should be taken from the patient or their caregiver. A short medical
history can be sampled through six basic categories that form the acronym SAMPLE (Table 1).
Symptoms are very often connected to the circumstances
that led to them. Multiple comorbidities of the patient and numerous
chronic medications can direct the therapeutic approach and examination (e.g., due to polyneuropathy in acute coronary syndrome,
people with diabetes do not necessarily have to have chest pain and
usually present with non—specific symptoms, which leads to the conclusion that a 12—lead ECG must be recorded). The time passed since
the last meal indicates stomach fullness with food, which impacts the
strategy for potential endotracheal intubation. The stomach is considered empty 6 hours after the consumption of solid food, 4 hours after
the consumption of liquid food, and 2 hours after the consumption
of water. In women of reproductive age, indicative information in the
medical history can be the time of the last menstruation (important in
TABLE !. Basic components of the SAMPLE history
S

SYMPTOMS

duration, intensity, character (e.g.,pain)

A

ALLERGIES

primarily to medications

M

MEDICATIONS

therapy for chronic diseases

P

PAST MEDICAL
HISTORY

in correlation with the previous section (M)

L

LAST ORAL INTAKE

the time elapsed since the last meal or drink

E

EVENTS LEADING TO THE
INCIDENT

circumstances in which symptoms happened

25
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

A

INTERVENTION

26

APPENDIX !: RECOGNITION OF AN ACUTELY ILL PATIENT
IN HOSPITAL CONDITIONS
Abnormal physiology is common in general wards, yet research
shows that observation and measurement of vital parameters occur
less than recommended. Assessment of simple vital signs may help
with the prevention of cardiopulmonary arrest. One of the ways to
increase the success of early identification of critical patients in the
wards is to use the Early Warning Score (EWS) protocol. EWS enables
repeated assessment of the patient’s vital parameters in defined time
intervals. The assessment is mainly carried out by a medical technician. If the patient scores 3—5, they are observed once every 4 hours.
If the sum is greater than 6 or more, it is necessary to alert the ward
doctor, who then assesses the need for more frequent observation
(for example, once every hour). Patients with a score of 9 or more require continuous monitoring, which is most often carried out in intensive care units, emergency room observation rooms, and other appropriate places. The most important is the recognition of major changes
for specific parameters in time intervals. If the patient’s condition
deteriorates, a decision is made on further treatment and the need to
refer the critical patient to treatment services.

SOURCES
1.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T, et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115-51.
2.
Barash PG, Cahalan MK, Cullen BF, Stock MC, Stoelting RK, Ortega R, Sharar SR,
Holt N, editors. Clinical Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2017.
3.
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of the Difficult
Airway. Practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway: an updated report
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of the
Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 2003; 98(5): 1269–77.
4.
Butcher BW, Quist CE, Harrison JD, Ranji SR. The effect of a rapid response team on
resident perceptions of education and autonomy. J Hosp Med. 2015; 10(1):8–12.
5.
Sandroni C, D'Arrigo S, Antonelli M. Rapid response systems: are they really effective?
Crit Care. 2015; 19(1): 104.
6.
Smith GB. In-hospital cardiac arrest: is it time for an in-hospital 'chain of prevention'?
Resuscitation. 2010; 81(9): 1209–11.
7.
Peran D, Kodet J, Pekara J, Mala L, Truhlar A, Cmorej PC et al. ABCDE cognitive aid
tool in patient assessment — development and validation in a multicenter pilot simulation study. BMC Emergency Medicine. 2020; 20(1): 95.

TABLE 2. Example of a scoring system of monitoring and recognition of patient deterioration
POINTS
3

2

1

AVPU
RASPIRATORY
RATE (/min)

1

2

A

.8

9

INSPIRED
OXYGEN
OXYGEN
SATURATION (%)

0

V, P, U

10-20

21-24

PULSE (/min)
SYSTOLIC BP
(mmHg)

.90

TEMPERATURE
(°C)

.35.0

/ 25
oxygen
therapy

air

.91

3

92-93

94-95

/ 96

.40

41-50

51-90

91-110

90-100

100-110

110-250

>250

35.036.0

36.138.0

38.139.0

111-130

/ 39.1

>131

27
1. 1. Initial assessment of acutely ill patients (ABCDE and SAMPLE)

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

the differential diagnosis of abdominal pain). In case it is not possible
to obtain the data from the patient, taking a history from a caregiver or
next of kin plays a significant role. Acutely ill patients may deteriorate
during the examination, therefore, it is important to take as much anamnestic data as possible while it is possible. In patients able to communicate, it is essential to initially inquire about basic data and then
continue the examination according to the ABCDE approach so that if
the condition deteriorates, there is some anamnestic data available.

28
Part 1: Deteriorating patient

Ivan 0eveljevi+, Ana Pi1uljan, Matej Bura
!. 2. ESSENTIALS FOR ECG INTERPRETATION IN
MEDICAL EMERGENCIES

An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a recording of the heart’s electrical
activity. Depending on the indication, it can be continuously monitored on an ECG monitor or recorded on graph paper in the form of a
12-lead ECG. The recording and interpretation of ECG is an indispensable part of the assessment of an acutely ill patient, and it is a basic
skill that every doctor must acquire. It is important to point out that
the ECG shows the electrical activity of the heart but not the mechanical activity of the heart (heart contraction). Hence, it is necessary to
palpate the pulse for the assessment if electrical activity ultimately
produces a mechanical one.
!. 2. !. THE CONDUCTION SYSTEM OF THE HEART AND THE
NORMAL CARDIAC CYCLE ON THE ECG
In order for the heart to perform its basic role as a pump, two steps
are necessary:
1.
Generation and conduction of the electrical signal through
the heart.
2.
Cardiac contraction and relaxation.
The first step requires the so-called conductive heart fibres and the
second the contractile heart fibres. The conductive heart fibres represent the part of the heart specialised for initiating and efficiently
conducting the electrical impulse to the cells that are capable of

29

30
R

R

PQ
INTERVAL

ST INTERVAL

QT INTERVAL

T

P

J
Q

U

T

P
Q

S
TP INTERVAL

PQ
ST
SEGMENT SEGMENT

U

J
S

0,04s (40ms)

0,2s (200ms)

1mm

5mm

25mm/s

FIGURE !. Normal cardiac cycle on ECG (courtesy of Josip Eljuga, MD)

contraction. In a healthy patient, the electrical signal (in the form of
an action potential) originates in the SA node (“cardiac pacemaker”),
from where it spreads through the atria to the AV node. The signal
is briefly “slowed down” while passing through the AV node and
then quickly transmitted through the bundle of His, its right and left
branches, and the network of Purkinje fibres towards the contractile
ventricular fibres. The mentioned slowing of the signal in the AV node
allows the atria to contract first during the cardiac cycle and expel the
blood towards the ventricles, after which the filled ventricles contract.
In order to better understand the ECG recording, it is necessary to
note that each action potential consists of depolarisation and repolarisation, whereby depolarisation stimulates cardiac contraction
(systole), while repolarisation enables cardiac relaxation (and filling of
chambers with blood during diastole).
“Translation” of the mentioned process into one cardiac cycle
on the ECG (Figure 1): atrial depolarisation is represented by the P
wave, conduction through the atria and the AV node is represented by
the PR interval (from the beginning of the P wave to the beginning of
the QRS complex; normally 0.12—0.20 s), where deceleration through
the AV node is the PR segment (from the end of P to the beginning
of the QRS), ventricular depolarisation is represented by the QRS
complex (normally up to 0.12 s), while ventricular repolarisation is represented by the T wave.
!. 2. 2. ECG MONITORING
ECG monitoring is used for continuous monitoring of the heart’s electrical activity, which enables the assessment of rhythm and rate in real
time. Using ECG monitoring, it is not possible to analyse the ST junction and the duration of individual segments (PR, QT, QRS). If such an
analysis is necessary, it is indicated to record a 12-lead ECG.

TYPES OF MONITORING ARE:
a)
3-lead monitoring: it is recorded using electrodes attached
according to the “traffic light principle” (red electrode above
the right clavicle, yellow above the left clavicle, green in the
projection of the apex of the heart). This enables the monitoring of leads I, II, and III.
b)
Monitoring using self-adhesive electrodes or defibrillator
pads: it is recorded by placing one electrode/pad under the
right clavicle and the other in the middle axillary line to the
left (anteroposterior placement is also possible). This is also
the method of choice in the arrest and post-resuscitation
period. It enables only monitoring of the lead II.
In practice, we use the following six questions for quick ECG analysis in medical emergencies:
1.
Is there any electrical activity? If there is no electrical activity, the rhythm is asystole. If electrical activity is present but
disorganised (“bizarre”, without identifiable QRS complexes),
the rhythm is ventricular fibrillation (VF). Asystole and VF are
rhythms incompatible with life because they cannot produce
a pulse and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be
started immediately. If we see those while monitoring a living
patient (patient with a pulse), it is probably artefacts and/or
wrong position/connection of the electrodes. If organised
electrical activity is seen, the rhythm is further analysed
according to questions 2—6. It is important to point out the
case in which electrical activity is seen, but the patient has
no pulse, which is called pulseless electrical activity (PEA). It
does not require further analysis of the rhythm, and it is extremely important to start CPR without delay.
2.
What is the ventricular (QRS) rate? The normal heart rate is
60—100/min. A rate slower than 60/min is called bradycardia, and a rate faster than 100/min is called tachycardia. The
rate reading is usually presented on the monitor, but it can
also be calculated from a longer printout on graph paper
(explained later).
3.
Is the QRS rhythm regular or irregular? We compare the
lengths of the R-R intervals, and we can also use sound
signals from the monitor. A regular rhythm with intermittent
irregularities (i.e., premature complexes) most often indicates
extrasystoles (they can be of atrial or ventricular origin). If the
rhythm is completely irregular (“irregularly irregular”) and all

31
1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

Indications for patient monitoring are rhythms during cardiac
arrest and other significant arrhythmias, chest pain, cardiac decompensation, collapse/syncope, shock/hypotension, palpitations,
and any other condition in which the patient is acutely endangered
(e.g., sepsis, polytrauma, etc.).

RR INTERVAL

32

5.

6.

The most precise answer is obtained by analysing a longer printout. Conduction between atria and ventricles is normal if PR < 0.20 s.
Each P wave is followed by a QRS complex, and the P wave is located
before each QRS complex. First-degree AV block is characterised by
prolongation of PR (> 0.20 s). Second-degree AV block Mobitz Type I
(Wenckebach AV block) is characterised by a progressive prolongation
of the PR interval until there is no QRS, after which the cycle starts from
the beginning. Second-degree AV block Mobitz Type II is characterised
by a constant PR interval with occasional individual QRS absences. In
the third-degree AV block (complete AV block, “AV dissociation”), there is
no conduction through the AV node, so the frequencies of the atria and
ventricles are independent of each other (the ratio of P and QRS waves
is irregular and unrelated).
RHYTHM ANALYSIS (EXAMPLES):
a)
Ventricular fibrillation (VF): VF is incompatible with life, and the
patient has no pulse. Since it is a “shockable” resuscitation rhythm,
the priority in CPR is defibrillation as early as possible.

arrhythmia is present. If we see this recording on the monitor,
and the patient has no pulse, this rhythm is called PEA, and it
is necessary to start CPR without delay. PEA can look like any
other rhythm (except for the remaining “resuscitation rhythms”,
which can be asystole, ventricular fibrillation, and pulseless ventricular tachycardia).
I

II

c)

I

II

d)

Atrial fibrillation (AF) with an average ventricular rate of around
130/min: P waves are not visible, and absolute ventricular

Atrial undulation with a ventricular rate of about 80/min.

aVF

e)

aVF

b)

Broad-complex tachycardia — in this case, ventricular tachycardia (VT) with a rate of about 150/min. VT is a rhythm compatible with life, and the patient’s pulse should be palpated. If there
is no pulse, it is a pulseless VT, so CPR with defibrillation as early
as possible is a priority. In case the patient has a pulse, we follow
the tachycardia algorithm.

II

Third-degree AV block with a ventricular rate of 32/min. The
ventricles have “their own rhythm”, which is slower and independent of the atria. There is no QRS after each P wave, no P wave
before each QRS, and the PR interval, if present, is variable.
V6

33
1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

4.

QRS complexes are morphologically equal, it is most likely atrial
fibrillation (AF).
Is the QRS complex normal or prolonged? QRS complexes normally last up to 0.12 s (up to three “small squares” on the printout).
A normal/narrow QRS complex indicates that the rhythm is “supraventricular” (above the bifurcation of the bundle of His). An extended QRS (prolonged duration) indicates that the rhythm originates
from the ventricle (e.g., ventricular tachycardia) or might be supraventricular but transmitted with aberrant conduction (branch block,
accessory pathway conduction, etc.).
Is atrial activity present? It is necessary to look for P waves: sinus
P waves are most often clearly visible in the lead II as upright
waves. The absence of atrial activity, i.e., its disorganisation, indicates AF. Regular atrial activity in the form of fast “saw-tooth”
waves indicates atrial undulation. When possible, interpretation of
atrial activity should be facilitated (especially in fast rhythms) by recording a 12-lead ECG and analysing all leads (usually, atrial activity
is easiest to determine in V1).
How does atrial activity relate to ventricular activity? Does a QRS
follow each P wave, and is there a P wave before each QRS? What
is the length of the PR interval?

34

THE BASIC ANALYSIS CONSISTS OF FOUR PARTS:
1.
RHYTHM — we determine it using the “six questions for rhythm
analysis” discussed earlier. Sinus rhythm (SR) (Figure 3) is a
normal rhythm and is the result of regular activity of the SA node
and normal conduction of the electrical signal to the contractile
heart muscles (P waves are upright in leads I and II, each QRS
is preceded by P waves, the PR interval is constant). There are
many irregular rhythms (FA, VT, heart blocks, arrhythmias with
bundle branch blocks, and many others), but we will not go into a
more detailed analysis here (Figure 4).
2.
RATE — we can use the “300 method”. We do this by finding the
R wave that coincides with the thick line on the ECG recording
and, depending on which following thick line the R wave falls on,
we calculate the rate. The first line represents 300, the second
150, the third 100, the fourth 75, the fifth 60, and the sixth 50/min.
This rule only applies to regular rhythms. For irregular and slow
rhythms, take 25 cm of recording paper (represents 10 s), count
the QRS complexes, and multiply the number by 6 to get a heart
rate expressed as beats/min.
3.
ELECTRICAL AXIS — represents the direction of depolarisation
of the ventricles and is normally between (30° to +90°. Axis deviation can indicate pathology (left axis deviation is from (30°
to (90°, right axis deviation is from +90° to +180°, and extreme
axis deviation is from +180° to +270°). The simplest method is
to determine the axis by quadrants. We observe the QRS complexes in the leads I and aVF and determine whether they are
predominantly positive or negative. A positive QRS in the lead
I means that the electrical axis is going to the left, and a negative QRS means that the axis is going to the right. Likewise,
a positive QRS in aVF means that the axis is going down, and
a negative QRS means that the axis is going up. By combining
these values in the coordinate system, we determine the electrical axis of the heart. In the case of a positive QRS in lead I and

35
A

B

FIGURE 2. A) STANDARD PRECORDIAL LEADS (the right leads, V3R–V6R, would be recorded
by switching electrodes V3–V6 to the right side of the chest at the same level) B) POSTERIOR
LEADS — recorded from the posterior of the chest at the same level as V6 (V7 in the left
posterior axillary line, V8 on top of the left scapula, V9 to the left paravertebrally) (courtesy of
Josip Eljuga, MD)

1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

!.2.3.INTERPRETATION OF !22LEAD ECG
A more detailed analysis of the heart’s electrical activity is not possible without a 12-lead ECG, and there are numerous causes of
changes in the ECG (ischaemia, pericarditis, arrhythmias, pulmonary
embolism, electrolyte disorders, drugs, implanted pacemaker, etc.).
A standard 12-lead ECG is usually recorded by placing 10 electrodes,
which results in a recording of six peripheral (I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF)
and six precordial leads (V1—V6). Peripheral leads are projected in the
vertical plane and the precordial leads are projected in the horizontal
plane which enables a three-dimensional analysis (see Figure 7). In
addition to the standard ones, recording can be supplemented by
placing additional leads (Figure 2), for example, posterior leads (to
confirm posterior myocardial infarction) or right leads (to confirm right
ventricular infarction).

36

!. 2. 4. ST2SEGMENT2ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
(STEMI) ON ECG
ECG criteria for the diagnosis of STEMI are ST elevation in two or
more contiguous leads. Contiguous leads are leads that “look at” the
same myocardial wall, i.e., the vascularisation area of the same coronary artery (Figure 7 and Figure 8), with the elevation having to be
) 1 mm (0.1 mV, “one small square”), except in V2 and V3 where more
strict criteria apply, e.g., ) 2.5 mm for men < 40 years, ) 2.0 mm for
men > 40 years, ) 1.5 mm for women). We determine the location of
the infarction according to the leads in which the ST elevation is present. In patients with inferior STEMI (ST elevation in leads II, III, aVF),
it is recommended to record the right leads (V3R—V6R) for possible
confirmation of right ventricular infarction (Figure 9B).
ST elevation is often “paired” with a reciprocal ST depression
in the “opposite” leads (Figure 9A, Figure 9B, and Figure 9C). Thus,
ST depression in V1—V3 may suggest a “mirror image” of posterior
STEMI, so it is necessary to record the posterior leads (V7—V9). ST
elevation ) 0.5 mm is sufficient to confirm posterior STEMI (Figure
8). New-onset left bundle branch block (LBBB) in the clinical presentation of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is considered equivalent to
STEMI. ST depression ) 1 mm in eight or more leads followed by ST
elevation in aVR and/or V1 suggests obstruction of the left coronary
artery (“left main”) or severe “triple-vessel coronary artery disease/
ischaemia” (Figure 10).
Figure 7 represents the largest coronary arteries: the left anterior descending artery (LAD), the circumflex branch of the left coronary
artery (LCx), and the right coronary artery (RCA). Contiguous leads
“look at” the same wall, i.e., the vascularisation area of the same coronary artery, and the location of the infarction is determined according to the leads in which the ST elevation is present (notice how the

I

V1

II

V2

III

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

FIGURE 4. Normal ECG: sinus rhythm, rate 60/min, normal electrical axis, without ischaemic
changes

I

V1

II

V2

III

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

FIGURE %. Rhythm disorder in a chronic kidney disease patient with potassium levels over
8 mmol/L. The ECG shows absent P waves (“atrial standstill”) with an additional broad QRS
complex rhythm with a rate of 30/min. Hyperkalaemia can also cause other arrhythmias
(asystole, VF, VT, AV blocks, bundle branch blocks, etc.).

I

V1

II

V2

III

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

FIGURE &. ECG performed in a patient with chest pain. The ECG shows sinus rhythm, rate
60/min, normal electrical axis, negative T waves in leads I, aVL, V2–V6. Further assessment
verified non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI); percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) was performed with placement of stents in the anterior descending and
circumflex branches of the left coronary artery (LAD and LCx).

37
1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

4.

a negative QRS in lead aVF, to confirm whether it is a left axis
deviation or a physiological axis, look at lead II — a negative QRS
in the same lead indicates axis deviation.
ANALYSIS OF THE ST SEGMENT AND T WAVE — normally, the
ST segment is in the isoelectric line (the J point — the beginning of the ST segment is compared with the TP interval, which
represents the isoelectric line) (Figure 1), and the T waves are
positive (except in aVR and V1). Changes that suggest myocardial ischaemia are inverted (negative) T wave (Figure 6) and
ST-segment depression. ST-segment elevation can be a sign
of acute myocardial infarction and some other conditions (pericarditis, vasospastic angina, benign early repolarisation, left
bundle branch block, etc.). It is necessary to look at all 12 leads
and analyse these segments, and it is also useful to monitor the
dynamics of these changes over time by periodically repeating
the ECG recording.

39
180°

0°

I LEAD

-150°

LCX

V
7

UM
PT
SE

V2

V
3

V
4

V
5

V
6

D(
+1
20

V1

°)

RV

°)

0
+6

D(

EA

II L

V4R

-30°

V
8

LV

M

RCA

aVL

LE
A

LAD

V
9

aVF
+90°

FIGURE '. Simplified representation of the heart and leads (courtesy of Josip Eljuga, MD)

I

V1

II

V2

III

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

FIGURE 3. Anteroseptolateral STEMI — ST elevations in I, aVL, V1–V6. The patient underwent
primary PCI with stent placement in the anterior descending branch of the left coronary
artery (LAD).

1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

aVR

U
PT
SE

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

peripheral leads are projected in the vertical plane, and the precordial
leads In the horizontal plane, which enables 3D analysis). We distinguish the following:
—
Septal STEMI (LAD occlusion): ST elevation in V1—V2.
—
Anterior STEMI (LAD occlusion): ST elevation in V3—V4.
—
Lateral STEMI (LCx occlusion): ST elevation in V5, V6, I, aVL.
—
Posterior STEMI (RCA or LCx occlusion): ST elevation in V7—V9,
reciprocal ST depression in V1—V3.
—
Inferior STEMI (RCA occlusion): ST elevation in II, III, aVF, reciprocal ST elevation in lateral leads (right leads V3R—V6R should also
be recorded to confirm/exclude right ventricular infarction!)
—
Combinations of the previously mentioned are also possible,
e.g., anteroseptolateral STEMI (also called “extensive anterior
infarction”, ST elevation in V1—V6, I+aVL) and inferoposterior
STEMI (ST elevation in II, III, avF, and V7—V9, reciprocal ST depression in V1—V3).

III

38

40

a)
V1

II

V2

III

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

II

V2

III

II

Device:

V1

V3

aVR

V4

aVL

V5

aVF

V6

FIGURE !5. Triple vessel coronary artery disease. Diffuse ST depression with ST elevation in
aVR and V1. The rhythm shows atrial fibrillation.
Speed: 25 mm secL

imb: 10 mm mV

Chest: 10.0 mm mV

F 50 0.15 - 100Hz

100B CL

b)

V4
V5
V6

c)
V4

V5

V6

FIGURE 4. a) Inferoposterior STEMI of the right ventricle (the result of right coronary artery
occlusion), b) Due to ST elevation in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF), the right leads were
recorded, which confirmed right ventricular infarction, c) ST depression in V1–V3 suggests
a reciprocal change, so the recording of the posterior leads confirmed the infarction of the
posterior wall; Noticeable reciprocal ST depressions in I, aVL, and aVR and ST elevation in V6.

SOURCES
1.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T, et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115-51.
2.
Life in the Fast Lane [Internet]. ECG Library 2021 [updated 2024, cited 23.11.2022.].
Available from: https://litfl.com/ecg-library/
3.
Ibanez B, James S, Agewall S, Antunes MJ, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, Bueno H et al. 2017
ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation: The Task Force for the management of acute
myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation of the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2018; 39(2): 119–177.
4.
Jameson, JL, Fauci A, Kasper D, Hauser S, Longo D, Loscalzo J. Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine. 20th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.

41
1. 2. Essentials for ECG interpretation in medical emergencies

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

I

I

42

Katarina Bo*i+ and Matej Bura
!. 3. INTRAVASCULAR AND INTRAOSSEOUS ACCESS

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

!. 3. !. INTRAVASCULAR ACCESS
Adequate intravascular access is one of the main preconditions of
adequate care for acutely ill patients. It ensures fast and direct administration of medication and fluid therapy, including blood products
and other intravenous fluids. Intravascular access can be established
via a peripheral vein, a central vein, or intraosseous access. In practice, one or more peripheral venous accesses are most often placed.
In cases when that is not possible, alternatives for peripheral intravascular access include intraosseous access (in out-of-hospital conditions) and central venous access (in hospital conditions). This chapter
focuses on techniques for establishing intravenous (IV) and intraosseous (IO) access, competencies that every medical doctor should have
after graduation. As with every other skill, it is important to point out
that the technique requires practice and experience.
Intravenous access is established by placing a cannula in the
peripheral vein. There are several sizes of cannulas available, each
size having its specific colour. The flow through the cannula depends
on its size, i.e., diameter, which is measured in Gauges (G) and written
on the cannula packaging. The larger the Gauge, the smaller the diameter of the catheter and the slower the infusion flow. In an adult
acutely ill patient, the standard is to place at least two large-bore
IV cannulas with a diameter greater than 18 G, colloquially “green,
white, or grey.”

43

1

44

B

A
D

C

FIGURE !. 1) intravenous cannulas of different sizes, 2) IV cannula in standard commercial set,
A) Luer lock plug with flashback chamber and needle grip (which is removed after the puncture of the vein and placement of the cannula), B) wings that are used for manipulation of the
cannula during placement and its fixation after placement, C) Blushing, valve and injection
port cap, D) Luer connector

KEY POINTS:
— The technique must be practised.
— In acutely ill patients, at least two wider-bore accesses are
the basis of patient care.
!. 3. 2. INTRAOSSEOUS ACCESS
Circulatory shock and cardiac arrest significantly disturb the patient’s
haemodynamics, and setting up intravenous access to such a patient
sometimes presents a major challenge. Furthermore, the procedure
can be difficult in certain groups of patients, such as children (due to
subcutaneous fatty tissue that makes it difficult to palpate the vein

45
1. 3. Intravascular and intraosseous access

Part 1: Deteriorating patient
2

If possible, the procedure needs to be explained in detail to the
patient before the beginning. Compliance and, therefore, the success
of the procedure is higher in that case. It is also necessary to check
the equipment with which the procedure is performed (for example,
whether the infusion system is completely filled with infusion fluid).
The procedure begins with palpation of the desired venepuncture
site; standard positions are the branches of the dorsal venous arch
of the basilic vein, the basilic vein located cubically, the beginning of
the cephalic vein located on the hand, and the cephalic vein in the
upper arm. There are facilitating manoeuvres that can be used: tying
the limb cranially to the venepuncture site (tourniquet), instructing the
patient to lower their hand below the level of the heart and squeeze
the hand into a fist several times, rubbing with an alcohol antiseptic
solution, after which the vein is more clearly visible, and choosing a
vein that has a straight course in the length of several centimetres. It
is often more important to palpate the vein well rather than to see it
well. Placing an IV cannula is performed in several steps: the skin 3 to
4 cm distal to the venepuncture site is stretched (especially in elderly
patients, in whom placement may be significantly more difficult due
to reduced skin turgor) and then disinfected. The patient is warned
to expect a puncture. The vein is punctured at an angle from 10° and
30° from the surface of the patient’s skin. After obtaining blood return
in the flashback chamber, the cannula is placed another millimetre
into the lumen of the vein and then laid horizontally next to the patient’s skin. The tourniquet is released, and the cannula should then
be “swiped” over the needle into the vein while simultaneously pulling
the needle out. The distal part of the cannula is then connected to the
infusion system, and flow is started. The patient may feel a sensation
of coldness, but pain proximal to the site of the catheter placement,
as well as swelling of the surrounding tissue may indicate a blown
vein due to improper needle insertion and/or a fragile vein with an
escape of the infusion paravascularly. In that case, the IV cannula
should be removed and the procedure repeated on another, more
proximally located vein. Once the cannula has been successfully
placed, secure its position on the skin using the stickers.

Part 1: Deteriorating patient
FIGURE 3. Equipment for establishing intraosseous access

In children, there are some special considerations when choosing a place of insertion. One should take into account the epiphyseal
cartilage and bone growth zones. The distal femur can be considered
an alternative to the previously mentioned sites.
Contraindications for intraosseous access placement are bone
fracture, osteomyelitis, infection of the skin and soft tissues over the
bone, the patient with an artificial joint or bone in that place, intraosseous access already placed on that bone in the last 48 hours, and the
inability to determine typical palpation sites.
The equipment consists of the following: a drill or a gun with a
single shot on which the needle is (magnetically) inserted, a system
for connecting to a classic set for infusion solutions, and a cuff for applying the infusion solution under pressure. Once the correct position
for insertion is selected and aseptic preparation of the skin at the site
of the planned insertion is made, the drill with the attached needle is
oriented perpendicularly to the patient’s bone. Piercing the skin and
subcutaneous tissue is done with a needle, without drilling, and after
contact with the periosteum, the drilling can start. The goal is to pass
through the compact part of the bone and reach the spongious tissue
of bone, which can be felt as a loss of resistance. Once the cancellous
bone is reached, the drilling should be stopped. The stylet is removed
from the catheter, and the remaining part is fixed to the skin. Aspiration of the content (bone marrow) confirms the adequate position.
Prior to fluid administration, breakage of the fibrin mesh in the spongious part of the bone should be done, usually with the application
of a fluid bolus (volume of 5–10 mL). The procedure itself is painful,
therefore, if the patient reacts to pain, it is necessary to apply 2–4 mL
of 2% lidocaine before the bolus to anesthetise the septal area. After
applying the bolus, it is possible to connect the intraosseous access

47
1. 3. Intravascular and intraosseous access

and place the cannula), the elderly (they often have fragile atherosclerotic blood vessels), and intravenous drug addicts. According to
the guidelines for the management of acutely ill patients, two failed
attempts to establish intravenous access are an indication for the establishment of intraosseous access.
There are typical places for establishing intraosseous access in adults:
—
Proximal part of the humerus: the patient’s arm is adjusted in
adduction and internal rotation, and the hand is fixed under the
lower back. The greater tubercle and the surgical neck of the
humerus are palpated. The ideal insertion site is on the greater
tubercle, 1 cm above the surgical neck of the humerus.
—
Proximal part of the tibia: the patient’s leg is placed in extension.
The ideal insertion point is 2 cm distal and 2 cm medial from the
tibial tuberosity, on the bone surface.
—
Distal part of the tibia: the ideal place of insertion is 3 cm proximal to the most prominent part of the medial malleolus. Palpation of the anterior and posterior borders of the tibia is necessary
in order to perform the insertion on a flat part of the bone.

46

48

KEY POINTS:
— Two failed attempts of intravenous access are an indication
for intraosseous access in acutely ill patients.
— Typical placement positions: proximal humerus, proximal
tibia, distal tibia.
— Fluid bolus to break fibrin mesh – analgaesia.

SOURCES
1.
Perry, AG, Potter, PA, Ostendorf, W. Clinical Nursing Skills and Techniques. 9th ed.
Mosby; 2017.
2.
American Society of Anesthesiologist. Practice Guidelines for Central Venous Access
2020: An Updated Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force
on Central Venous Access. Anesthesiology. 2020; 132(1): 8-43.
3.
Belmont D. Venipuncture and Peripheral Intravenous Access Reichman EF. In:
Reichman EF, editor. Emergency Medicine Procedures. 2nd ed. New York: Mcgraw-Hill
Education; 2013. P. 296-308.
4.
Alson RL, Han KH, Campbell JE. International Trauma Life Support for Emergency
Care Providers. 9th ed. Pearson; 2021.

49
1. 3. Intravascular and intraosseous access

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

to the infusion system, but the infusion solution must be administered
under pressure higher than atmospheric. This is most often done by
using a cuff/pump. All solutions and drugs that are regularly administered intravascularly, except for cytostatics, can be administered via
intraosseous access. Possible complications are infection, compartment syndrome or fluid extravasation. It should be removed from the
patient 48 hours after placement or sooner.

50

Ivan Vuksan, Erika 0uper-Petrinjac
!. 4. ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) ALGORITHM

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

The advanced life support (ALS) algorithm is a standardised approach
for the management of patients in cardiac arrest. It is extremely
useful because it allows starting the treatment without losing time for
discussion, thus increasing the team’s efficiency in resuscitation.
Heart rhythms associated with cardiac arrest can be divided
into two groups:
1.
shockable rhythms, which include pulseless ventricular tachycardia (pVT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) and
2.
non-shockable rhythms, which include pulseless electrical activity (PEA) and asystole (Figure 1).
The main difference in the management of the two mentioned
groups is that patients with pVT/VF need to be defibrillated as early
as possible, i.e., receive an electrical shock to the heart. Other cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) actions, such as heart compressions,
airway management and ventilation, intravenous/intraosseal access,
administration of adrenaline, and identification and management
of reversible causes, are common to both groups. Other additional
procedures may be indicated if cardiac arrest is caused by special
circumstances. It is essential to note that procedures that improve
survival after cardiac arrest include prompt and effective bystander
CPR, high-quality chest compressions with minimal interruptions and
early defibrillation.

51

52

7.

A

9.

B

10.
11.

C

12.
D

13.
14.
FIGURE !. Examples of cardiac arrest rhythms: A: ventricular tachycardia, B: ventricular
fibrillation, C: PEA, D: asystole

!. 4. !. MANAGEMENT OF SHOCKABLE RHYTHMS (PVT, VF)
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

Confirm cardiac arrest by simultaneously checking the pulse
and breathing for 10 seconds.
Call the resuscitation team.
Initiate chest compressions 30:2 while simultaneously placing
self-adhesive defibrillation/monitoring pads — one below the
right clavicle and the other at the V6 position in the midaxillary
line.
Stop chest compressions to avoid artefacts on the monitor.
Confirm VF/pVT on ECG.
Immediately continue chest compressions. At the same time,
the person on the defibrillator should choose the appropriate energy (150–200 J biphasic for the first defibrillation and
150–360 J biphasic for the following defibrillations) and press
the charge button.
While the defibrillator is charging, warn all present team
members, except the one performing CPR, to stand back
and move the oxygen source at least one meter away from
the defibrillator.

!. 4. 2. TREATMENT OF NON2SHOCKABLE RHYTHMS
(PEA, ASYSTOLE)
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

Begin CPR 30:2.
As soon as the IV/IO access is established, give adrenaline 1 mg
IV/IO.
Continue CPR 30:2 until the airway is secured (then continue with
chest compressions without stopping during ventilation) for 2
minutes.
After 2 minutes, check the rhythm: If organised electrical activity is shown, the pulse and/or signs of life should be checked.
a) If there is a pulse and/or signs of life, start post-resuscitation
care. b) If there is no palpable pulse and/or no signs of life (PEA —
pulseless electrical activity), continue CPR.
While performing CPR, think about reversible causes of death (4H
and 4T).
After 2 minutes, check the rhythm and continue depending on the
assessed rhythm (in the case of persistent cardiac arrest, once
given, repeat adrenaline 1 mg IV every 3–5 minutes — every other
2-minute cycle of CPR):
— If the monitor shows VF/pVT, follow the other side of the algorithm that includes defibrillation.
— If asystole is shown on the monitor, continue CPR.

53
1. 4. Advanced life support (ALS) algorithm

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

8.

When the defibrillator is charged, tell the person performing the
massage to “step back”. When the person moves away, deliver
the shock.
Immediately after shock delivery, proceed with CPR (30:2) without
checking the rhythm or pulse, starting with chest compressions.
Continue CPR for 2 minutes and secure the airway with an advanced device during that time.
After 2 minutes, stop briefly and check the monitor.
If the rhythm is VF/pVT, repeat steps 6–10 and deliver a second
shock. Continue CPR for 2 minutes. If the airway is secured with
an advanced device (e.g., laryngeal mask or endotracheal tube),
perform CPR continuously without a break for ventilation with
chest compressions at the rate of 100-120/min and respiratory
rate of 10/min. Think about reversible causes of death (4H and
4T). If a reversible cause is detected, begin correcting it.
If VF/pVT persists, repeat steps 6–8 and deliver a third shock.
Immediately resume CPR and give adrenaline 1 mg IV/IO and
amiodarone 300 mg IV/IO while performing CPR for the next
2 minutes.
If VF/pVT persists, repeat the 2-minute sequence of CPR
— rhythm/pulse check — defibrillation.
Give another 1 mg of adrenaline IV after delivery of every other
shock (e.g., every 3–5 min).

54

Unresponsive with absent
or normal breathing

Asses rhythm
Shockable
(VF/PULSELESS VT)

Non–shockable
(PEA/ASYSTOLE)

1 shock

Immediately resume chest
compressions for 2 minutes

Return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC)

Immediately resume chest
compressions for 2 minutes

Give high-quality chest
compressions and
— Give oxygen
— Use waveform
capnography
— Continous compressions
if advanced airway
— Minimise interuptions to
compressions
— Intravenous or
intraosseous access
— Give adrenaline every
3-5 min
— Give amiodarone after 3
shocks
— Identify and treat

Identify and treat reversible
causes
— Hypoxia
— Hypovolaemia
— Hypo-/hyperkalaemia/
metabolic
— Hypo-/hyperthermia
— Thrombosis – conorary or
pulmonary
— Tension pneumothorax
— Tamponade – cardiac
— Toxins
Consider ultrasound
imaging to identify reversible causes

Consider
— Conorary angiography/
percutaneous conorary
intervention
— Mechanical chest
compressions to facilitate
transfer/treatment
— Extracorporeal CPR
After ROSC
— Use an ABCDE approach
— Aim for SpO- of 94-99%
and normal PaCO— 12 Lead ECG
— Identify and treat cause
— Targeted temperature
menagment

FIGURE 2. Advanced life support algorithm (retrieved from Adult Advanced Life Support
Course Manual published by the European Resuscitation Council, 2021)

TABLE !. Reversible causes of death (4H and 4T)
4H

4T

Hypoxia

Tension pneumothorax

Hypovolaemia

Tamponade

Hyperkalaemia, hypokalaemia,
and metabolic disorders

Thrombosis (coronary thrombosis,
pulmonary embolism)

Hypothermia

Toxic agents

SOURCES
1.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115–51.

55
1. 4. Advanced life support (ALS) algorithm

Part 1: Deteriorating patient

CPR 30:2
Attach defibrillator/monitor

Call EMS/Resuscitation
team

During the treatment of cardiac arrest, you should keep in mind
the possible reversible causes that led to it, which are divided into
two groups (4H and 4T) to make them easier to remember (Table 1).
Hypoxia: reduce the risk of hypoxia by oxygenating with 100%
oxygen, adequate ventilation, and securing the airway by placing an
i-gel or an endotracheal tube.
Hypovolaemia: pulseless electrical activity is often caused
by hypovolaemia, which can result from, for example, bleeding or
sepsis. The intravascular volume should be replaced immediately
with intravenous fluids and blood through a wide-lumen peripheral
venous cannula (min. green IV cannula, diameter 18 G and wider).
Hyperkalaemia, hypokalaemia, hypoglycaemia, hypocalcaemia, and other metabolic disorders can be detected by laboratory
tests or from medical history (e.g., kidney failure). Each of these conditions requires specific therapy.
Hypothermia: hypothermia should be suspected in all drowning victims and patients found outdoors. When measuring temperature, use a thermometer with a low-temperature reading option.
Such patients should be warmed by passive (blankets, aluminium
foil) and active methods (heating the air, giving warm IV fluids, rinsing
cavities with warm fluids).
Tension pneumothorax: may be the primary cause of pulseless
electrical activity. The most important causes of tension pneumothorax are trauma, barotrauma in patients on positive pressure
ventilation, and asthma. The treatment is rapid thoracostomy or
needle thoracocentesis.
Tamponade: can be diagnosed by placing an ultrasound probe
below the xiphoid. If tamponade is the cause of cardiac arrest, it is
necessary to perform an emergency thoracotomy or pericardiocentesis as soon as possible.
Drug poisoning: can be detected later by laboratory tests. If
available, use appropriate antidotes.
The most common cause of thromboembolic or mechanical
obstruction is massive pulmonary embolism (PE) or coronary artery
thrombosis. If it is suspected that the cardiac arrest is caused by a
pulmonary embolism, consider immediate administration of thrombolytics. Furthermore, the suspicion of a thromboembolic incident
of the coronary arteries can be established from the patient’s history
(chest pain) or by pre-arrest 12-lead ECG (with documented ischaemic changes).

56

PART !: DETERIORATING PATIENT

Keypoints

Always do the ABCDE approach for initial assessment. DO NOT skip any part. By
the end of the assessment the goals are — patent airway, adequate oxygenation
and ventilation, haemodynamic stability, correction of neurological state (when
possible, otherwise — just note the current state) and to identify possible causes.

Part 2: Cardiac Emergencies

Include SAMPLE whenever possible (ask the family, witnesses, etc.).
Use 6-question approach for ECG rhythm analysis in medical emergencies.
Basic interpretation of 12-lead ECG includes analysis of the rhythm, rate, electrical
axis and ST segment and T wave changes.
CPR — if you do not provide high quality chest compressions/rescue breaths, all
else is in vain.
Follow the ALS algorithm, identify the rhythm as soon as possible and treat
accordingly. High quality CPR is equally important in shockable and nonshockable rhythms because it keeps the brain alive.
Shockable rhythms — defibrillate IMMEDIATELY, get to know the defibrillator
and needed energies at your workplace prior to approaching a patient. Add
adrenaline/amiodarone in appropriate doses after 3rd defibrillation.
Non-shockable rhythms — adrenaline 1 mg iv in a fast bolus.
Reassess the rhythm every two minutes. Repeat adrenaline every 3-5 minutes
after first application.
Secure the AIRWAY (usually with i-gel) and establish IV/IO access after the first
rhythm recognition, not excuses for delaying the rhythm recognition.
Treat reversible causes — 4H/4T.
Post-resuscitation care — ABCDE again. Try to normalize every parameter you can.

57—78

58
Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

Gordana Ba1i+
2. !. INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND MANAGMENT OF A PATIENT
WITH ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME

2. !. !. INTRODUCTION
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a clinical condition caused by
sudden, critical myocardial ischaemia. It most often occurs due to
atherosclerotic plaque rupture or erosion and the consequent clot
formation in the coronary artery, leading to partial or complete luminal obstruction. This results in acute derangement in myocardial
perfusion, which, depending on the severity and duration, leads to
cardiomyocyte necrosis and myocardial infarction. The ACS is one of
the leading causes of death in developed countries and is considered
one of the greatest emergencies in modern cardiology and medicine
in general. Therefore, it is crucial to promptly recognise a patient with
ACS and start treatment as early as possible to reduce the risk of
complications and mortality.
2. !. 2. DIAGNOSIS
Since this clinical condition is assigned the highest level of emergency, making the diagnosis as early as possible is crucial. It is essential
to recognise the clinical signs and analyse the ECG, and then make a
working diagnosis of the acute coronary syndrome without waiting for
laboratory results to confirm or exclude cardiomyocyte injury.

59

60

CLASSIFICATION OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES
Based on the initial ECG findings, ACS is classified into two forms:
1.
ST-segment elevation ACS (STE-ACS) (> 20 minutes) (Figure 1)
2.
Non-ST-segment elevation ACS (NSTE-ACS) – characterised by
signs of myocardial ischaemia in the form of ST-segment depression, transient ST-segment elevation, and negative T waves, but
the ECG findings may be normal (Figure 2 and Figure 3).
This classification correlates with the pathophysiology of a critical coronary lesion and, at the same time, determines the treatment
method. STE-ACS is usually caused by complete atherothrombotic
occlusion of one of the coronary arteries and results in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). The aim with such patients is
to enable reperfusion as soon as possible, i.e., to re-establish flow
in the endangered myocardium area using percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) or, very rarely nowadays, using fibrinolytic drugs.
On the other side, NSTE-ACS is usually caused by partial or intermittent coronary artery occlusion, which in some patients also results

in non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), while
in others, cardiomyocyte necrosis is absent (normal cardiac troponin
levels), which is called unstable angina pectoris. In a small number of
patients, NSTE-ACS can manifest as persistent myocardial ischaemia
and consequent recurrent or refractory chest pain, acute heart failure,
haemodynamic instability, or malignant ventricular arrhythmias. Accordingly, the approach to the treatment of NSTE-ACS depends on the
estimated risk of adverse events. In certain patients, as well as in STEMI
patients, emergency invasive approach and revascularisation are necessary, while in others, it is possible to start with drug therapy.
2. !. 3. MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME
Despite the aforementioned classification, ACS is actually a spectrum
of clinical conditions with a common aetiology and pathogenesis and,
therefore, entails numerous overlaps in approach and treatment, especially in the early prehospital phase or emergency hospital admission.

FIGURE !.
Morphology of ST-segment elevation in patients with STE-ACS

FIGURE 2.
Morphology of ST-segment depression in patients with NSTE-ACS

FIGURE 3.
T-wave morphologic variations in patients with NSTE-ACS

61
2. 1. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with acute coronary syndrome

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
In most patients, ACS is manifested by the sudden onset of chest discomfort that lasts more than 20 minutes. It usually occurs in the space
behind the sternum as a burning, discomfort, pressure, or dull pain.
Recurrent, shorter episodes of chest pain are also possible. The pain
can spread to the neck, arms (most often to the left shoulder and arm),
lower jaw, or back. In the case of inferior wall myocardial infarction,
epigastric pain can occur with or without spreading to the retrosternal
area. The pain often occurs at rest, without being provoked, typically
early in the morning, and it usually awakens the patient from sleep. The
onset of symptoms can also be triggered by physical exertion or emotional stress. When ischaemia affects a large part of the myocardium,
it can lead to acute heart failure, the presentation of which can vary
from mild signs of pulmonary congestion to acute pulmonary oedema
or cardiogenic shock. Due to the increased electrical excitability of the
ischaemic myocardium, various rhythm disorders are possible, from
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, ventricular extrasystoles, and short-term
episodes of unstable ventricular tachycardia to persistent ventricular
tachycardia accompanied by haemodynamic instability or ventricular
fibrillation and consequent cardiorespiratory arrest. Conduction disorders at different levels are also possible; for example, varying degrees
of AV block due to injury to the conduction system or accentuated
vagal tone, usually associated with an inferior myocardial infarction. In
some patients, like the elderly or people with long-standing diabetes,
the clinical presentation of ACS can be atypical in the sense of undefined chest discomfort, shortness of breath, nausea, or generalised
weakness.
After the targeted medical history, a 12-lead ECG should be recorded, if possible, within 10 minutes of the first contact.

62

TREATMENT OF ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME
Suppression of pain and dyspnoea
Reducing pain is one of the important initial steps in treating ACS
patients since pain is associated with activation of the sympathetic
nervous system, consequent vasoconstriction and tachycardia, and
thus additional oxygen needs in an already ischaemic myocardium.
A dose of 0.4 mg sublingual nitroglycerin is most often administered,
which can be repeated up to three times at intervals of 5–10 minutes.
Nitrates should be avoided in patients with systolic blood pressure
below 90 mmHg and in suspected right ventricular infarction.
In the case of persistent pain, it should be considered to administer intravenous morphine in single doses of 2–4 mg every 5 minutes
until the pain stops, i.e., until reaching the highest dose of 20 mg. For
preventing nausea and vomiting, antiemetic drugs should always be
used with opioids. Morphine should be administered slowly by intravenous injection to prevent respiratory depression, hypotension, or
bradycardia. Besides acting as an analgaesic, morphine also has a
desirable haemodynamic effect due to vasodilation of the venous and
arterial system, thus reducing the myocardial oxygen demand.
In hypoxic patients, oxygen should be administered in case the
Sa0' is below 90%, while routine oxygen administration is not recommended due to the possible harmful effect of hyperoxia on the injured
myocardium. In the case of signs and symptoms of pulmonary congestion, the patient should be given an intravenous diuretic (furosemide 20–40 mg or the dose the patient takes at home), and depending on the severity of the accompanying respiratory insufficiency,
non-invasive or invasive ventilation may be indicated.
TREATMENT OF STE2ACS
In STE-ACS patients in whom symptoms appeared within 12 hours,
urgent coronary angiography and primary PCI are indicated to mechanically open the occluded coronary artery as early as possible.
Therefore, when diagnosing STE-ACS on-site or in health institutions

that do not have a PCI centre, the patient should urgently be transported to a centre with a primary PCI program.
Since the activation of platelets and the coagulation cascade
play a key role in the pathophysiology of ACS, it is essential to give
dual antiplatelet therapy as early as possible, i.e., a combination of
acetylsalicylic acid and a potent P2Y12 receptor inhibitor in a loading
dose of:
—
Oral acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg.
—
Oral P2Y12 inhibitor — ticagrelor 180 mg or prasugrel 60 mg (or
clopidogrel 600 mg).
Compared to clopidogrel, ticagrelor and prasugrel lead to faster,
more reliable, and stronger inhibition of platelet aggregation (onset
of action 30 min vs. 2–6 h for clopidogrel), which is why clopidogrel is
used only in case the two abovementioned drugs are not available or
are contraindicated.
PERIPROCEDURAL AND POSTPROCEDURAL TREATMENT
OF STE2ACS
During coronary angiography and PCI, patients also receive an anticoagulant drug, i.e., unfractionated heparin (70–100 U/kg) or, less
often, low-molecular-weight heparin (enoxaparin 0.5 mg/kg IV). If
there are no other indications, further use of anticoagulant therapy
after PCI is not indicated except for thromboprophylaxis (prevention
of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism).
Intravenous administration of GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors, which belong
to the group of antiplatelet drugs, should be considered in patients
with angiographically detected extensive coronary artery thrombosis
or in patients without a no-reflow or slow-flow phenomenon.
After PCI, patients continue with dual antiplatelet therapy in a
maintenance dose for the next 12 months:
—
Acetylsalicylic acid 75–100 mg
—
Ticagrelor 2x90 mg or prasugrel 10 mg (reduced dose of 5 mg
for BW < 60 kg or age > 75) or clopidogrel 75 mg
At the end of the mentioned period, the P2Y12 inhibitor is discontinued, and the patient continues to take acetylsalicylic acid permanently. Depending on the individually assessed risk of bleeding
and risk of ischaemic events, the period of dual therapy can be shortened or extended in certain patients.
FIBRINOLYTIC THERAPY
If the estimated time from STEMI diagnosis to PCI reperfusion is
longer than 120 minutes, it is recommended to administer intravenous fibrinolytic therapy with a fibrin-specific agent (alteplase).
Thanks to the developed network of primary PCI, it is rarely indicated
today. Fibrinolysis is also followed by dual antiplatelet therapy in loading doses (acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg, i.e.,
75 mg at age > 75), and the patient must then be transported to the

63
2. 1. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with acute coronary syndrome

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

Along with a targeted medical history and 12-lead ECG, the approach to each patient with a working diagnosis of acute coronary
syndrome emphasises the assessment and treatment of cardiac and
circulatory disorders (C from circulation in ABCDE) and must include:
—
Setting up venous access,
—
Measuring vital parameters (blood pressure, heart rate, Sp0'
levels),
—
Short physical examination focused on the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems,
—
Continuous ECG monitoring with an available defibrillator
—
Taking blood samples for laboratory analysis (in emergency hospital admission),
—
Suppression of pain and dyspnoea,
—
Application of antiplatelet therapy.

PCI centre to perform routine early coronary angiography and PCI
within 2–24 hours.

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

TREATMENT OF NSTE2ACS
As previously mentioned, there are different categories of NSTEACS patients. The correct choice of treatment strategy is based on
an early assessment of the risk of ischaemia and bleeding in each
patient. NSTE-ACS patients are divided into three categories according to the risk of ischaemia, which also determines the degree
of urgency and time of invasive cardiac assessment (Table 1):
1.
Very high risk — emergency coronary angiography (< 2 hours
from admission),
2.
High risk — early invasive assessment (< 24 hours from
admission),
3.
Low risk — selective invasive assessment (only in patients
in whom non-invasive assessment shows signs of inducible
ischaemia).
In very high-risk patients, the treatment strategy is the same
as in STEMI patients. Before referring to urgent invasive assessment, we should try to suppress the patient’s pain and administer
acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg as early as possible. In NSTE-ACS, it is
no longer recommended to routinely administer P2Y12 inhibitors
before coronary angiography and insight into the anatomy of the
coronary arteries. Studies have shown that pretreatment with P2Y12
inhibitors does not improve outcomes compared with their use
during PCI and can significantly endanger the patient and increase
the risk of bleeding in the case of indication for urgent surgical revascularisation due to multivessel coronary artery disease.
In other NSTE-ACS patients, initial drug therapy includes anti-thrombotic and anti-ischaemic therapy. Antithrombotic therapy
includes:
—
Acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg initially, then in a maintenance
dose of 100 mg.
—
Anticoagulant: fondaparinux 2.5 mg SC or enoxaparin 2 6 1
mg/kg.
Beta-blockers are indicated for reducing myocardial oxygen
demand (if the patient is haemodynamically stable and without
signs of acute heart failure). In persistent pain, we should also administer nitrates sublingually or intravenously. Most NSTE-ACS
patients undergo invasive assessment in the aforementioned time
intervals, except for patients who do not have high or very high-risk
criteria, with normal troponin levels, in whom non-invasive testing
excluded inducible ischaemia.

PERIPROCEDURAL AND POSTPROCEDURAL TREATMENT
OF NSTE2ACS
A patient with an indication for PCI after a coronary angiography
should receive a potent P2Y12 inhibitor in a loading dose – prasugrel 60 mg or ticagrelor 180 mg and additionally a bolus of unfractionated heparin (70–100 U/kg) or enoxaparin (0.5 mg/kg BW) if
the patient has previously received it. If there is no other indication,
further use of anticoagulant therapy after PCI is not indicated even
in NSTE-ACS patients, except for thromboprophylaxis.
Recommendations regarding dosage and duration of dual
antiplatelet therapy in NSTE-ACS patients are the same as in
STE-ACS patients.
TABLE !. Classification of NSTE-ACS patients depending on the risk of ischaemic events
and complications
VERY HIGH RISK

HIGH RISK

LOW RISK

— haemodynamic instability /
cardiogenic shock
— acute heart failure
— recurrent/refractory pain
— malignant arrhythmias
— mechanical complications
of MI
— ECG pattern of multivessel
coronary artery disease

— NSTEMI diagnosis
— emerging/dynamic ST/T
segment changes
— out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest without ST elevation
or cardiogenic shock
— GRACE score > 140

— absence of very high
and high-risk criteria
— absence of recurrent
episodes of pain

SOURCES
1.
Corrigendum to: 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation: The Task
Force for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur
Heart J. 2021; 42(14): 1289–367.
2.
Ibanez B, James S, Agewall S, Antunes MJ, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, Bueno H et al. 2017
ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation: The Task Force for the management of acute
myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation of the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2018; 39(2): 119–77.

65
2. 1. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with acute coronary syndrome

64

66
Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

Gordana Ba1i+
2. 2. INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF A PATIENT
WITH CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA

2. 2. !. INTRODUCTION
Cardiac rhythm disorder, or arrhythmia, refers to any abnormality in
the generation and/or conduction of a cardiac impulse. Arrhythmias
include a spectrum of disorders, from harmless and haemodynamically insignificant to those leading to haemodynamic collapse and
cardiac arrest. We often encounter patients with various cardiac
rhythm disorders in daily clinical practice, especially in outpatient
emergency services and emergency hospital admissions. Therefore,
it is essential to know how to approach such a patient and assess
whether their condition is life-threatening and requires urgent treatment. For this to be possible, it is necessary to be familiar with the
most common arrhythmias and their potential complications.
2. 2. 2. CLASSIFICATION OF ARRHYTHMIAS
Cardiac rhythm and conduction disorders are usually classified according to heart rate into tachyarrhythmias (> 100/min) and bradyarrhythmias (< 60/min).
Depending on the place of origin, tachyarrhythmias are divided
into supraventricular and ventricular, and in everyday practice, a
more practical classification is into narrow (QRS * 120 ms) and broad
(QRS > 120 ms) QRS complex tachycardias. In the case of broad QRS
complex tachycardia, cardiac rhythm is most often of ventricular
origin, but it can also be a supraventricular disorder (for example, SVT

67

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

with bundle branch block or aberrancy, SVT in preexcitation syndrome).
Ventricular tachycardia always represents a serious diagnosis and a
greater risk of haemodynamic collapse and/or transition to ventricular
fibrillation with consequent cardiac arrest.
Bradyarrhythmias occur as a result of disorders in the generation
or conduction of impulses at the level of the sinus node or lower parts of
the conduction system (AV node, bundle of His). They can be manifested by various disorders, from sinus bradycardia, sinoatrial block, sinus
arrest, bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome, or varying degrees of atrioventricular block. After the initial assessment of the patient’s condition
and, if necessary, emergency treatment, we must distinguish between
a reversible disorder (due to the effects of drugs, electrolyte disorders,
hypothyroidism, hypothermia, or myocardial infarction) or an irreversible
condition resulting from an intrinsic conduction system disorder. It is
also important to recognise physiological bradycardia caused by excess
vagal tone or in athletes when a sinus rhythm of 40–50/min at rest or up
to 30/min during sleep is considered a normal finding.
The haemodynamic effect of a cardiac rhythm disorder in each
patient will depend on the type of arrhythmia, its frequency, duration, and
the presence of structural heart disease. Thus, a person with a healthy
myocardium will tolerate extreme heart rate well (> 150/min, < 40/min),
while in people with heart failure or coronary disease, even significantly
smaller heart rate deviations will cause symptoms and unfavourable
haemodynamic effects.
2. 2. 3. INITIAL APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH A CARDIAC
ARRHYTHMIA
In patients with cardiac arrhythmia, two procedures are essential:
—
assessment of the clinical condition,
—
recognition of arrhythmia and being aware of its potential haemodynamic effects.
Assessment of the clinical condition implies the detection of
adverse signs or symptoms, the presence of which indicates a serious
rhythm disorder that haemodynamically threatens the patient and requires immediate treatment. Adverse signs include:
1.

2.
3.
4.

Hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg) – if it is accompanied by symptoms of hypoperfusion of the target organs (pale
skin, cold sweat, confusion, inappropriate urine output) we are
talking about shock.
Heart failure — signs of pulmonary congestion that can vary from
the auscultatory finding showing late inspiratory crackles over the
lung bases to the presentation of acute pulmonary oedema.
Myocardial ischaemia — can present with symptoms such as chest
pain and/or ECG changes (ST depression, negative T waves).
Syncope — a short-term, temporary loss of consciousness with

complete recovery that occurs due to a sudden drop in
cardiac output and thus brain hypoperfusion.

69

A very efficient and rapid method for the initial assessment
and detection of adverse signs in a patient is the ABCDE (airway,
breathing, circulation, disability, exposure) approach and patient
care. Special emphasis is placed on the intravenous route, recording a 12-lead ECG, and continuous ECG monitoring, blood pressure,
and Sp0'.

2. 2. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with cardiac arrhythma

68

2. 2. 4. TREATMENT
Initial treatment in the outpatient emergency department or emergency hospital admission will depend primarily on the patient's haemodynamic stability and, of course, the type of arrhythmia. Treatment options are drugs, electroshock delivery in the form of synchronised cardioversion or defibrillation for tachycardia disorders,
and external electrostimulation for bradycardic rhythm disorders.
In some patients, we can use vagal manoeuvres. It is also important
to remove possible triggers (electrolyte disorders, acid-base disturbances, hypoxia, medications).
TREATMENT OF TACHYCARDIA IN HAEMODYNAMICALLY
UNSTABLE PATIENTS
In patients who are haemodynamically unstable due to tachycardia, it is necessary to perform synchronised cardioversion, which
involves shock delivery during the R wave to prevent delivery during
the T wave and consequent ventricular fibrillation. The patient
needs to be sedated beforehand, usually with propofol in a 1 mg/
kg dose. The initial energy of the biphasic defibrillator is 120–150
J for broad QRS complex tachycardias and atrial fibrillation and
70–120 J for regular narrow QRS complex tachycardias, including
atrial flutter. In the case of failure, increasing the energy level in the
next shock is recommended, with a maximum of three attempts.
If conversion does not occur after the third shock, administer
amiodarone 300 mg IV over 10–20 minutes, then repeat synchronised cardioversion.
TREATMENT OF TACHYCARDIA IN HAEMODYNAMICALLY
STABLE PATIENTS
If the patient has no adverse symptoms, treatment will depend
on the type of arrhythmia. Therefore, the 12-lead ECG should be
analysed in detail, and a differential diagnosis should be made to
detect the disorder. In that sense, the classification of tachycardias
according to the QRS complex broadness and the RR interval regularity is useful.

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

71

ASSESS with ABCDE approach
— Give oxygen if SpO- < 94% and obtain IV access
— Monitor ECG, BP, SpO-. Record 12 lead ECG
— Identify and treat reversible causes
(e.g. electrolyte abnormalities, hypovolaemia
causing sinus tachycardia)

Life-threatening features?
1. Shock
2. Syncope
3. Myocardial ischaemia
4. Severe heart failure

YES

TACHYCARDIA

Synchronised shock up to 3 attempts
— Sedation, anaesthesia if conscious
If unsuccessful:
— Amiodarone 300 mg IV over 10-20 min,
or procainamide 10 - 15 mg/kg IV
over 20 min;
— Repeat synchronised shock

NO

Stable
Seek expert help

Is QRS narrow (<0.12 s)?

Narrow QRS
Is QRS regular?

Broad QRS
Is QRS regular?

Irregular?

Unstable

Regular?

Regular?

Irregular?

Vagal manoeuvres
Possibilities include:
— Atrial fibrillation with bundle
branch block–treat as for irregular
narrow complex
— Polymorphic VT
(e.g. torsades de pointes)–give
magnesium 2 g over 10 min

If VT (or uncertain rhythm):
— Procainamide 10-15 mg/kg IV
over 20 min or
— Amiodarone 300 mg IV over
10-60 min
If previous certain diagnosis of SVT
with bundle branch block/ aberrant
conduction:
— Treat as for regular narrow complex tachydardia

If ineffective:
Adenosine (if no pre-excitation)
— 6 mg rapid IV bolus;
— If unsuccessful give 12 mg
— If unsuccessful give IV 18 mg

If ineffective:
— Verapamil or beta-blocker
If ineffective:
— Synchronised DC shock up to
3 attempts
— Sedation, anaesthesia if consious

FIGURE !. Tachycardia algorithm (retrieved from www.crpguidelines.eu, under permission
from the European Resuscitation Council, 2021)

Probable atrial fibrillation:
— Control rate with beta-blocker or
diltiazem
— Consider digoxin or amiodarone
if evidence of heart failure
— Anticoagulate if duration > 48h

!

2. 2. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with cardiac arrhythma

70

72

IRREGULAR BROAD QRS COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
In stable patients, it is usually atrial fibrillation with bundle branch
block, while other options are atrial fibrillation with preexcitation
(Wolff-Parkinson-White-WPW-syndrome) and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, which are more often accompanied by haemodynamic instability.
In the case of atrial fibrillation with bundle branch block, the
approach to the patient is described in detail in the section on
narrow QRS complex tachycardias.
Atrial fibrillation with pre-excitation represents an emergency
and, most often, the need for urgent synchronised cardioversion
due to the high risk of transition to ventricular fibrillation. Another
option is the use of antiarrhythmic drugs, of which procainamide
has proven to be the safest. Among the drugs available in our
country, propafenone IV in a dose of 1.5–2 mg/kg can be considered. It is contraindicated to use drugs that slow down the AV conduction (beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, adenosine) and
thus stimulate conduction through the accessory pathway, which
can lead to a further increase in heart rate and occurrence of ventricular fibrillation.
Polymorphic VT with a prolonged QT interval in the basic
ECG (torsade de pointes) also usually requires urgent treatment
because of the high incidence of transition to ventricular fibrillation. In such patients, it is necessary to administer magnesium
sulphate 2 g IV, correct electrolyte disorders, and stop using drugs
that prolong the QT interval. If the arrhythmia persists, the option
is overdrive pacing, for which it is necessary to place temporary
transvenous pacing.
REGULAR NARROW QRS COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias (AVRT, AVNRT), atrial
tachycardia, or atrial flutter with regular AV conduction are most
often presented as regular narrow QRS complex tachycardias.
It is initially recommended to apply a vagal manoeuvre (pressure on the carotid sinus or the Valsalva manoeuvre by blowing

into a 10 mL syringe), which can terminate PSVT in 54% of cases if
performed correctly. On the other hand, in cases of atrial flutter or
atrial tachycardia, by slowing AV conduction, the vagal manoeuvre
can unmask the flutter waves or P waves. Sometimes it can stop
atrial tachycardia, depending on the mechanism of its origin. If the
vagal manoeuvre does not stop the tachycardia, adenosine should
be administered in a rapid IV bolus dose of 6 mg, then 12 mg and 18
mg if the previous administration was unsuccessful.
If adenosine does not stop the tachycardia nor unmask the
atrial flutter, metoprolol 2.5–5 mg IV can be administered up to a
maximum of 15 mg or verapamil 2.5–10 mg IV. If the pharmacological
treatment fails, we can perform synchronised cardioversion, which
is rarely necessary for PSVT.
In the case of atrial flutter, the treatment strategy is the same
as in patients with atrial fibrillation, including the prevention of
thromboembolic events.
IRREGULAR NARROW QRS COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
It most often presents as atrial fibrillation or, less often, atrial flutter
with variable AV conduction. It is essential to know when the arrhythmia occurred and to assess the risk of thromboembolic complications. If arrhythmia lasts > 48 h or the time of onset is unknown, a
heart rate control strategy is indicated using beta-blockers (bisoprolol 1.25–10 mg orally, metoprolol 2.5–5 mg IV up to a total dose of
15 mg or 25–200 mg orally) or very rarely by using calcium channel
blockers (verapamil 2.5–10 mg IV). The target ventricular rate is <
110/min at rest, and if it is not achieved by one of the mentioned
drugs, we can consider digoxin (0.2–0.4 mg IV up to a total saturation
dose of 1 mg in 24 h; oral maintenance dose 0.1 mg). In such cases,
conversion to sinus rhythm without prior anticoagulation for at least
3 weeks is contraindicated due to the risk of thromboembolic complications. If the patient has been regularly taking oral anticoagulant
therapy, it is possible to proceed with the cardioversion procedure.
If AF occurs within 48 hours, pharmacological cardioversion
can be attempted; if this is unsuccessful, synchronised electrocardioversion can be attempted. Choosing antiarrhythmic drugs
depends on the presence of structural heart disease. In patients
without structural heart disease, the option is propafenone 1.5–2 mg/
kg IV for 10 minutes, and in patients with known heart disease, the
option is amiodarone 5–7 mg/kg for 1–2 hours. Depending on the estimated long-term risk of thromboembolism (CHA2DS2-VASc score),
some patients will need permanent oral anticoagulant therapy.
TREATMENT OF BRADYARRHYTHMIA IN HAEMODYNAMICALLY
UNSTABLE PATIENTS
In patients with haemodynamic instability due to bradyarrhythmia,
we often encounter third-degree AV block, second-degree Mobitz
Type ll AV block or AV block 2:1, and sinus arrest. Treatment options

73
2. 2. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with cardiac arrhythma

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

REGULAR BROAD QRS COMPLEX TACHYCARDIA
Regular broad QRS complex tachycardia can be classified as ventricular tachycardia (80%) or supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)
with bundle branch block (15%) or with anterograde conduction
over the accessory pathway (5%). Any regular broad QRS complex
tachycardia is considered ventricular tachycardia until proven otherwise. The procedure is the following:
—
Administer amiodarone 300 mg IV over 20–60 minutes or
procainamide 10-15 mg/kg IV over 20 minutes (currently not
available in our country).
—
Previous certain diagnosis of SVT with bundle branch block –
treat as for the narrow complex tachycardia.

74

BRADYARRHYTHMIA IN HAEMODYNAMICALLY STABLE PATIENTS
Immediate treatment is unnecessary in patients who do not have adverse symptoms. We should try to find reversible causes and remove
them. It is also important to know which disorders inevitably require
further cardiological assessment and treatment due to possible progression to more severe forms and, thus, an increased mortality risk.
The following disorders are most often encountered:
—
First-degree AV block and second-degree Mobitz Type I AV
block — mostly benign and do not require active treatment.
—
Second-degree Mobitz Type ll AV block and third-degree AV
block — high risk of progression and mortality and represent
an indication for the implantation of a permanent pacemaker,
except in the case of a clear reversible cause.
—
Sinus bradycardia — indication for the implantation of a permanent pacemaker only when it is symptomatic and after reversible causes are excluded (sick sinus syndrome).

75

BRADYCARDIA
ASSESS with ABCDE approach
— Give oxygen if SpO- < 94% and obtain IV access
— Monitor ECG, BP, SpO-. Record 12 lead ECG
— Identify and treat reversible causes
(e.g. electrolyte abnormalities, hypovolaemia)

Life-threatening features?
1. Shock
2. Syncope
3. Myocardial ischaemia
4. Severe heart failure

Risk of asystole?
— Recent asystole
— Mobitz II AV block
— Complete heart block with broad QRS
— Venticular pause > 3 s

Atropine 500 7g IV

Statisfactory response

Consider interim measures:
— Atropine 500 7g IV repeat to maximum of 3 mg
— Isoprenaline 5 7g min–1 IV
— Adrenaline 2-10 7g min–1 IV
— Alternative drugs* and/or
— Transcutaneous pacing

Seek expert help
Arrange transvenous
pacing

!

Observe

*Alternatives include:
— Aminophylline
— Dopamine
— Glucagon (if bradycardia is caused by beta–blocker or calcium channel blocker)
— Glycopyrrolate (may be used instead of atropine)

FIGURE 2. Bradycardia algorithm (retrieved from www.crpguidelines.eu, under permission
from the European Resuscitation Council, 2021)

2. 2. Initial assessment and managment of a patient with cardiac arrhythma

Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

include the use of atropine and cardiac electrostimulation. Atropine
is administered in a dose of 0.5 mg IV, which can be repeated at intervals of 3–5 min up to a total of 3 mg. The effect of atropine will depend
on the mechanism and localisation of conduction disorders. Thus,
atropine will improve conduction in patients with increased vagal tone
or an AV node disorder. However, if the disorder is localised below the
AV node, it will worsen the impulse conduction and the patient’s condition. For this reason, the better option is to apply transcutaneous
external cardiac electrostimulation and urgently call the cardiology
service for further treatment.

76
Part 2: Cardiac emergencies

SOURCES
1.
Brugada J, Katritsis DG, Arbelo E, Arribas F, Bax JJ, Blomström-Lundqvist C et al. 2019
ESC Guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular tachycardia:
The Task Force for the management of patients with supraventricular tachycardia of
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2020; 41(5): 655–720.
2.
Glikson M, Nielsen JC, Kronborg MB, Michowitz Y, Auricchio A, Barbash IM et al. 2021
ESC Guidelines on cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization therapy. Eur Heart J.
2021; 42(35): 3427–520.
3.
Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, Arbelo E, Bax JJ, Blomström-Lundqvist C et al. 2020
ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation developed in
collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS):
The Task Force for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with the special contribution of the European
Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J. 2021; 42(5): 373–498.
4.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115–51.

78

PART 2: CARDIAC EMERGENCIES
Stick to the ABCDEs!

Keypoints

Part 3: Respiratory Emergencies

Not all patients have the exact same symptoms during acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Read the 12-lead EKG properly. Make sure to differentiate between STE-ACS and NSTEACS because the therapy is different.
For all ACS patients — administer oral acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg (even First Aid
providers are advised to give it to a person with chest pain), morphine for pain (nausea
might happen!), give sublingual nitroglycerine (beware of contraindications) and
oxygen when SpO- is below 90%.
STE-ACS — if within 12 hours — primary PCI is indicated as soon as possible, along with
oral P2Y12 inhibitors (prasugrel/ticagrelor).
NSTE-ACE — assess the risk, treat accordingly. Do not administer P2Y12 inhibitors prior
to coronary angiography.
When treating cardiac arrhythmias – look for life-threatening features:
— Shock
— Syncope
— Myocardial ischaemia
— Severe heart failure
Tachycardias with a life-threatening feature present are treated with synchronised
cardioversion at appropriate energy (up to 3 attempts), followed by amiodarone
infusion (300 mg IV over 10-20 min).
Bradycardias with a life-threatening feature present are treated with atropine 0,5
mg IV (up to 3 mg). If not responding — switch to transcutaneous pacing (alternative
medicines might be given, but the authors prefer this approach).
In the absence of life-threatening features, one might still have to treat bradycardias.
Check for risk of asystole (recent asystole, Mobitz II AV block, complete heart block
with broad QRS, ventricular pause >3s).

79—124

80

3. !. ACUTE RESPIRATORY FAILURE

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

3. !. !. INTRODUCTION
Acute respiratory failure happens as a primary failure in breathing or
as a secondary failure following other disorders in the body. It is characterised by the inability of the lungs to meet the body’s requirements
for oxygen and/or carbon dioxide removal.
Respiratory control is a complex activity. Automated rhythmic
breathing is controlled by the brain stem through multiple neuronal
groups. It can be interrupted by coughing and vomiting and is susceptible to voluntary control (e.g., speech). Central chemoreceptors
in the medulla oblongata are sensitive to hydrogen ion concentration (H+). An increase in the arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure
(PaCO') increases the PCO' in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which
causes a drop in pH and drives breathing. Peripheral chemoreceptors
(in the carotid bodies) are sensitive to hypoxia, but only by sensing a
drop in the arterial oxygen partial pressure (PaO') and not so much
the total oxygen content. Acidaemia, fever, and hypoperfusion are
also important ventilation drives.

81

83

Leftward shift
(increased affinity)
Decreased temp.
Decreased 2-3 DPG
Decreased H8

100

3. 1. Acute respiratory failure

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

OXYGEN TRANSPORT IN THE BLOOD
Oxygen is transported via haemoglobin (oxyhaemoglobin), and a
smaller fraction is dissolved in the blood.
Oxygen delivery (DO') is described by the following equation:

90

DO'=CO x ((1.39 x [Hb] x SaO')+ (PaO' x 0.03))
DO' — oxygen delivery (mL/min)
CO — cardiac output (L/min)
1.39 mL/g — oxygen-binding capacity of haemoglobin
[Hb] — haemoglobin concentration (g/L)
SaO' — blood oxygen saturation (haemoglobin), expressed as a fraction (e.g., 0.97 instead of 97%)
PaO' — oxygen partial pressure in arterial blood (mmHg)
0.03 — amount of dissolved oxygen in the blood (mL/L/mmHg) (37 °C)
Under normal circumstances, oxygen delivery is abundant compared to oxygen consumption. When something pathological occurs,
there is an imbalance between oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption. This is not exclusive to breathing difficulties. When a patient
bleeds, the haemoglobin content decreases, which also alters the
oxygen delivery capacity.
OXYGEN2HAEMOGLOBIN DISSOCIATION CURVE
The curve shown above describes the relationship between oxygen
saturation and partial pressure. It is not linear because the haemoglobin-oxygen affinity increases in an oxygen-rich environment. Haemoglobin is a tetramer, and each molecule binds four oxygen molecules.
Each oxygen molecule binds independently. The binding of the first
oxygen molecule increases the affinity for the next one (and so on).
The curve shifts left or right depending on certain conditions (as
shown in the figure above). A leftward shift (higher affinity/low tissue
release) occurs with hypothermia, alkalosis, and carbon monoxide
poisoning. A rightward shift (lower affinity/high tissue release) occurs
in fever and acidosis. In practical terms, it means that more oxygen is
released in the tissues during fever (which is good when the body is
fighting an infection).
OK, ENOUGH ABOUT OXYGEN, WHAT ABOUT CO',
Unlike oxygen transport, 98% of which is bound to (oxy)haemoglobin
and 1–2% of which is dissolved in the blood, carbon dioxide transport
is slightly different. About 10% is dissolved in the blood, 10–20% is
conjugated as carbamates (on deoxyhaemoglobin), and the majority
(70–90%) is transported as a bicarbonate ion after the following reaction occurs in the erythrocyte.

80

Oxyhaemoglobin saturation (%)

82

70
60

Rightward shift
(reduced affinity)
Increased temp.
Increased 2-3 DPG
Increased H8

50
40
30
20
10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

PaO- (mmHg)
FIGURE !. Oxygen — haemoglobin dissociation curve. Note the nonlinear relationship
between PaO- and SaO-. P50 is the PaO- at which the SaO- is 50%. The P50 value changes
when the curve shifts.

Reduced oxygen delivery and/or increased consumption
are the main causes of tissue hypoxia.

CO' + H'O

H'CO+

HCO+, + H-

Deoxyhaemoglobin has approximately 3.5 times greater affinity for CO'. Why is that important? In chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), patients have trouble breathing the air out of their
lungs effectively, which increases the amount of CO' content in the
body. Usually, it binds with deoxyhaemoglobin. When such a patient
receives oxygen therapy, this often leads to a further increase in
PaCO' levels, which can be fatal (why and how is explained in a later
chapter of this manual).

If we sum this all up and try to organise it in a better and clinically useful way, we can define four types of respiratory failure:

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

TYPE !. CLASSIC HYPOXAEMIC RESPIRATORY FAILUR
PaO' < 60 mmHg (< 8 kPa)
CAUSES:
—
alveolar oxygenation failure (low FIO', alveolar collapse, alveoli
filled with fluid or blood, infiltration…)
—
disrupted transition of oxygen from the alveoli to the blood (interstitial lung disease, pulmonary vascular disease)
—
reduced blood oxygen transport (obstructed flow, shunting, low
Hb concentration, defective Hb molecule).
TYPE 2. HYPERCAPNIC RESPIRATORY FAILURE
PaCO' > 45 mmHg (> 6kPa)
Defined as an inability to adequately remove CO' because of reduced
alveolar minute ventilation. This increase also leads to hypoxaemia
because of the substitution of O' with CO'. Hypoxia in this case is
usually easily corrected with oxygen therapy.
TYPE 3. PERIOPERATIVE RESPIRATORY FAILURE
A specific type of failure due to the circumstances in which it occurs
is caused by abnormal movements of the chest and abdomen due to
surgery/anaesthesia (residual drug effects) or injury. Both hypoxia and
hypercarbia occur.
Treatment: prevention with an adequate level of anaesthesia and/or
analgaesia, reducing unnecessary sedation, elevated head level, etc.
TYPE 4. HIGH2DEMAND RESPIRATORY FAILURE
The inability of healthy (or not primarily affected) lungs to maintain
increased ventilation in the case of a systemic hypermetabolic state.
Sepsis is one such condition. If the primary cause is left untreated or
there is no therapeutic response due to the nature of the state, respiratory muscle fatigue sometimes requires mechanical ventilation.

SOURCES
1.
West JB, Luks AM. West’s Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials. 11th ed. Wolters
Kluwer; 2021.
2.
Deranged Physiology [Internet, cited 12.12.2022]. Available from: https://derangedphysiology.com/main/home
3.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed. Elsevier;
2023.
4.
Life in the Fast Lane [Internet]. [updated 2024, cited 23.11.2022.]. Available from:
https://litfl.com

85
3. 1. Acute respiratory failure

84

86

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac
3. 2. OXYGEN THERAPY AND PULSE OXIMETRY

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Oxygen is one of the most commonly used drugs in modern medicine, and until recently, it was considered harmless and no special
dosing recommendations were needed. However, today, we are aware
of many adverse effects of oxygen, which, like any other drug, has a
recommended dosage regimen, administration route, side effects,
indications, and contraindications.
We all breathe oxygen at slightly less than 21% (FIO' 0.21). When
climbing to high altitudes, the percentage of oxygen remains the
same, but the partial pressure of gases decreases.
Administering oxygen increases oxygen concentration in the inspired air. The oxygen dose is the FIO', which is determined clinically
(administration route and flow rate). It can be administered to a spontaneously breathing person via nasal cannula, simple oxygen mask,
and non-rebreather mask. The approximate FIO' is presented in the
table below. Venturi masks are specially designed to deliver fixed FiO'
(colour-coded).
Indications for administering oxygen are compromised airway
patency and/or low SaO' level (below 94% in previously healthy
individuals, below 88% in COPD patients). Oxygen acts as a vasoconstrictor of coronary arteries. In a patient with chest pain, oxygen
administration is indicated when the SaO' level drops below 90%.
Oxygen produces ROS (reactive oxygen species), which demonstrates tissue toxicity. As an exemption, in haemorrhagic shock, we
can administer high-flow oxygen therapy even with normal SaO'

87

88

TABLE !. Approximate oxygen dose, measured as inspired oxygen fraction (FIO2), depending
on the device for oxygen delivery and suggested set flow rate
Oxygen flow rate

F9O- delivered

Nasal cannula

1-4 L/min

:0,21–0,30

Simple oxygen face mask

4–10 L/min

:0,35–0,60

Non-rebreather mask

10–15 L/min

:0,85 (can be up to 1)

Venturi face mask

Colour coded, fixed flow masks, exact F9O- written
on the mask

levels. Loss of haemoglobin in bleeding significantly reduces the
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and that can lead to severe
tissue hypoxia, even with normal saturation levels of the (remaining)
haemoglobin.
Pulse oximetry is a non-invasive method of continuous measurement of haemoglobin oxygen saturation. The probe is placed at
the fingertip, and the screen shows the SpO' percentage, oximetry
curve, and numerical heart rate. It measures light absorption from the
blood at two different wavelengths – 660 nm and 940 nm. One fraction of light passes through the tissue and another one is absorbed
in the tissue. It uses two wavelengths to distinguish between oxyhaemoglobin and deoxyhaemoglobin molecules.
LIMITATIONS
—
It does not provide information about ventilation, only about
oxygenation.
—
In the case of carbon monoxide poisoning, a falsely high reading
occurs due to similar wavelengths of oxyhaemoglobin and
carboxyhaemoglobin.

89
3. 2. Oxygen therapy and pulse oximetry

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Device for oxygen delivery

SOURCES
1.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed. Elsevier;
2023.
2.
Al-Shaikh B, Stacey GS. Essentials of Equipment in Anaesthesia, Critical Care, and
Peri-Operative Medicine. 5th ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2019.
3.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115–51.

90

3. 3. ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES (ABGs)

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Partial pressure describes the number of molecules in a mixture
of gases better than the percentage. For example, if we double the
total pressure of a mixture, partial pressures go double, and the
percentage stays the same. The atmospheric air we breathe is at 1
atm (100 kPa or 750 mmHg). The nitrogen partial pressure is 78 kPa
(and 78%) and the oxygen partial pressure is 21 kPa (21%). When we
breathe a 40% oxygen mixture, the oxygen partial pressure is 40
kPa. When a gas is dissolved in a liquid (e.g., blood), partial pressure
in the liquid is the same as the gas that is in contact with the fluid.
That is the Pmixture of a specific gas, e.g., PaO' (partial pressure of
oxygen in arterial blood).
For arterial blood gas analysis and determining acid-base
status, the following four key parameters are measured:
1.

pH — hydrogen ion concentration in the body is extremely
small (e.g., sodium concentration is 3 million times bigger),
therefore, we use the pH scale (1–14) to determine hydrogen ion
concentration. The pH of a normal blood sample is 7.35–7.45.
The relationship between hydrogen ions and pH is inversely
proportional. High pH means a drop in hydrogen ion levels.
The increase in blood pH is called alkalaemia. Low pH means
an increase in hydrogen ion levels. The drop in blood pH is
called acidaemia. Small changes in pH mirror big changes in
hydrogen ion concentration. Body enzymes function properly

91

92

CO' + H'O = H- + HCO+.

3.

It acts as an acid. An increase in CO2 will increase the hydrogen
ion concentration and promote acidaemia. Reduction of alveolar ventilation is the leading cause of the increase in CO2 values
if metabolic production remains constant. We call that respiratory acidosis. An increase in alveolar ventilation will cause a
drop in CO2 and promote alkalaemia. We call that respiratory
alkalosis. In a healthy individual, brain respiratory centres react
swiftly to the changes in hydrogen ion concentration and cause
a quick increase in alveolar ventilation.
HCO;< (bicarbonate) and BE (base excess) — The most common
way to interpret acid-base disturbances in a blood sample is
to analyse bicarbonates as a main buffering mechanism. Their
values are regulated in the kidney, and they oppose acids. They
act as bases and neutralise hydrogen ions, as shown in the
formula below.
H- + HCO+. = H'CO+
Normal values are 22–26 mmol/L. A decrease in the bicarbonate levels happens when they buffer the extra hydrogen ions.
It is a state of metabolic acidosis. An increase in bicarbonate
levels causes excess hydrogen ion buffering and a state of
metabolic alkalosis.
Metabolic and respiratory components are interdependent,
and the derangement of one component typically causes the
other to change as well to try to maintain a normal blood pH
value. Because the bicarbonate does not directly change blood
pH (it only serves as a buffer for the metabolic processes),
there are some other things worth noting.

There are three independent variables that affect blood pH:
1. STRONG ION DIFFERENCE (SID) – a difference in the sum of
strong cations (e.g., Na-, K-) and the sum of strong anions (e.g.,
Cl,, lactate).
2. Total concentration of plasma non-volatile buffers (A/0/) –
mostly determined by phosphates and albumin concentration.
3. PaCO'.
These three variables have a direct influence on blood pH,
whereas hydrogen ion and bicarbonate concentrations act as
dependent variables. To further explain this, it would take more
than the scope of this manual, so the author kindly advises you,
should you have additional interest, to seek information online.
Standard base excess is a calculated value defined by how
the SID should change to bring the pH value back to 7.4 with a
steady-state CO' value of 5.4 kPa (40 mmHg) at a normal body
temperature.
SID= ([Na- ]+[K-]+[Ca'-) ]+[Mg'-) ])-([Cl. ]+[lactate])
Metabolic acidosis is a product of a decreased SID value, which
in turn causes chemical reactions that increase hydrogen ion
concentration. SID is reduced when the human body loses
sodium bicarbonate (e.g., diarrhoea) or in the abundance of
exogenous anions (e.g., intoxication). Metabolic alkalosis is a
product of an increase in SID, which occurs when there is a drop
in strong anion concentration or an abundance of strong cations
(e.g., vomiting, diuretic therapy).
SID value is mostly regulated by kidneys, although the gastrointestinal system also contributes. Kidneys are unable to
quickly excrete significant amounts of strong ions, and it takes
a couple of minutes to hours to have an impact on SID. For every
chloride ion that is filtrated and not reabsorbed, a reduction in
SID happens. The equilibrium of chloride ion concentration is
the main drive for SID changes. In the stomach, chloride ions
are pumped into the lumen, which causes an increase in SID.
However, it is reabsorbed in the duodenum and returns plasma
SID to normal values. Should a person vomit, the chloride ion
cannot be reabsorbed. The body loses chloride ions and that
causes metabolic alkalosis (contrary to the seemingly logical
conclusion that the loss of hydrogen ions is the main reason for
alkalosis in such a scenario). Unlike the stomach, the pancreas
produces fluid with higher SID levels than plasma (scarce in
chloride ions). In the case of a significant loss of that fluid (as
may happen with surgical drainage), acidosis will ensue. In the
intestine, there is a small number of chloride ions, which are

93
1. 4. Advanced life support (ALS) algorithm

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

2.

only in a very narrow pH range. The human body makes a significant amount of hydrogen ions daily and then it buffers them
to prevent acidaemia. The most important intracellular buffers
are proteins and phosphates. The most important extracellular
buffers are plasma proteins and bicarbonates (HCO+-). Even if
the body pH is normal, an acid-base disturbance may still be
present, although in a compensated form.
PaCO- — carbon dioxide is a by-product of cellular metabolism.
To get to the lungs and out of the body, it is transported in the
blood, either dissolved in the plasma or bound to the haemoglobin and proteins. Normal values are 4.7–6.0 kPa (35–45 mmHg).

94

or HCO; = higher than 26 mmol/L? If so, metabolic alkalosis is
present (or renal compensation of respiratory acidosis).

The fraction of oxygen in the inspired air, F1O', is 0.21.
An estimated expected PaO' value is 10 points lower than the
percentage of inhaled oxygen. For example, if a person with no
disruption in lung oxygenation breathes an oxygen admixture of
40% (F1O' = 0.4), the predicted value of PaO' is 30 kPa.
ABG ANALYSIS (APPROACH ACCORDING TO THE EUROPEAN
RESUSCITATION COUNCIL):
1.

Step: Assess the patient!

2.

Step: Is the patient hypoxic? (don’t ignore the F2O')

3.

Step: Is the blood acidic or alkaline? > 7.45 — alkalaemia,
< 7.35 — acidaemia

4.

Step: What is happening with the PaCO- level?

4a.

If the pH is < 7.35 (acidaemia):
Step: Is the PaCO- level high? > 6.0 kPa (45 mmHg) – respiratory
acidosis (or respiratory compensation of metabolic alkalosis)

4b.

If the pH is > 7.45 (alkalaemia):
Step: Is the PaCO- level low? < 4.7 kPa (35 mmHg) – respiratory
alkalosis (or respiratory compensation of metabolic acidosis)

5.

Step: What is happening with HCO;= and BE?

5a.

If the pH is < 7.35 (acidaemia):
Step: Is the BE lower (more negative) than =2 mmol/L and/
or HCO3= lower than 22 mmol/L? If so, metabolic acidosis is
present (or renal compensation of respiratory alkalosis).

5b.

If the pH is > 7.45 (alkalaemia):
Step: Is the BE higher (more positive) than +2 mmol/L and/

95
3. 3. Arterial blood gases (ABGs)

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

4.

reabsorbed in the duodenum. We have a high concentration of
sodium, potassium, and bicarbonate. During diarrhoea, loss of
that fluid causes a reduction in SID and subsequent acidosis.
PaO- – normal partial pressure of oxygen in our atmosphere at
sea level is 21 kPa (157.5 mmHg). As it passes through the airway,
it gets moistened and mixed with carbon dioxide, which causes
it to drop to about 13 kPa (97.5 mmHg). PaO' is always smaller
than PAO' (partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli). The normal
value is higher than 11 kPa (82.5 mmHg). In extremely old patients and those with chronic lung disease, a value higher than 8
kPa is tolerated.

SOURCES
1.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed.
Elsevier; 2023.
2.
Al-Shaikh B, Stacey GS. Essentials of Equipment in Anaesthesia, Critical Care,
and Peri-Operative Medicine. 5th ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2019.
3.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support.
Resuscitation. 2021; 161: 115–51.

96

3. 4. ANAPHYLAXIS

Ivana Jurin1i+, Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening, generalised, or systemic
hypersensitivity reaction to an allergen. It is characterised by the
rapid development of life-threatening problems with the airway and/
or breathing and/or circulation. Although commonly associated with
anaphylaxis, skin and mucosal changes do not have to be present.
3. 4. !. INITIAL ASSESSMENT
A (AIRWAY):
Assess whether the airway is open. Anaphylaxis is associated with
airway obstruction at several different levels:
—
Swelling of the throat and tongue (pharyngeal/laryngeal
oedema): the patient breathes audibly, has difficulty breathing
and swallowing, and feels “their throat is closing”.
—
A hoarse voice is a sign of vocal cords oedema, in which
case the airway must be managed urgently by endotracheal
intubation.
—
Inspiratory stridor — high-frequency inspiratory noise caused by
upper airway obstruction.
B (BREATHING):
—
Swelling of the respiratory tract and bronchoconstriction can
lead to hypoxia. The patient usually tries to compensate by

97

98

—
—

C (CIRCULATION):
—
Circulatory derangements (often called anaphylactic shock)
can be caused by myocardial depression, vasodilation, and increased capillary permeability, followed by fluid loss from the
intravascular space.
—
Signs of shock may be present: tachycardia, hypotension,
patient complaining of dizziness, and/or pending collapse.
—
Anaphylaxis can cause myocardial ischaemia and ECG changes
even in patients with normal coronary arteries.
—
Anaphylaxis can lead to cardiac arrest!
D (DISABILITY):
—
The previously mentioned problems with the airway, breathing,
and circulation can lead to reduced brain perfusion and affect
the patient’s neurological status. Confusion, agitation, and loss
of consciousness may be present.
E (EXPOSURE AND ENVIRONMENT):
—
In about 80% of anaphylactic reactions, changes occur on the
skin and/or mucosa.
—
Erythema may be present – spotted or generalised red rash.
—
Urticaria may be present (also called hives), which can appear
anywhere on the body. Hives can be pale, pink, or red and
remind of nettle burns.
—
Angioedema is similar to urticaria but includes swelling of
deeper tissues, most often the eyelid area and sometimes the
mouth and throat.
—
Although skin changes are stressful and cause concern for
both patients and those treating them, skin changes without
life-threatening problems with the airway, breathing, or circulation are not anaphylaxis.
SAMPLE — patients who have already had anaphylaxis are at a higher
risk of developing it again. Positive history of exposure to an allergen
is also important, as well as previously known allergies.
The most common allergens that cause anaphylaxis in adults
are insect bites, food intake (fish, shellfish, nuts), intake of drugs
(penicillin and cephalosporin antibiotics, non-steroid antirheumatic
drugs), and latex.

3. 4. 2. TREATMENT
Once the ABCDE assessment is made and anaphylaxis is confirmed,
an imperative is to call for help. Treatment of anaphylaxis is based on
managing respiratory and circulatory problems. Adrenaline will act
on several different levels: by constricting the dilated vessels and reducing their permeability and by having the bronchodilating effect in
the lungs. Thus, it has a therapeutic effect on the systemic effects of
released histamine.
In anaphylaxis, adrenaline is given only intramuscularly (IM)
in a dose of 0.5 mg in the anterolateral side of the middle
third of the thigh.
Adrenaline is given intravenously only by experienced specialists in a diluted form due to the disastrous consequences it can have.
However, it is important to have an intravenous or intraosseous route
open for administering intravenous fluids to replace the intravascular
volume (significant hypovolaemia is present due to increased capillary permeability and vasodilatation). The airway and breathing are
managed by setting up a high flow of oxygen and endotracheal intubation (if you are not skilled — ask for help!).
Antihistamines and corticosteroids are only the second-line
treatment for anaphylaxis and must not delay the administration of
adrenaline, administration of oxygen, endotracheal intubation, and
intravenous replacement of fluids.

99
3. 4. Anaphylaxis

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

—

increasing both the frequency and work of breathing, which can
lead to the patient becoming tired and unable to breathe adequately due to exhaustion.
Bronchospasm can be heard on auscultation of the lungs in the
form of wheezing, prolonged expiration, and, in severe cases,
the so-called silent chest.
A decrease in oxygen saturation is possible.
Anaphylaxis can lead to respiratory arrest!

100

ANAPHYLAXIS

Anaphylactic reaction?

How to be sure of the diagnosis?
— acute onset of symptoms
— present life–threatening disorders of the respiratory
tract, breathing and circulation
— urticarial rash (absent in about 20% of patients)

DOES PATIENT HAS LIFE–THREATENING SIGNS
AND ANAPHYLAXIS IS SUSPECTED?
YES

CALL FOR HELP!
DO NOT DELAY IN STARTING TREATMENT

Adrenaline 0.5 mg intramuscularly*
Start airway and breathing menagement
Orotracheal intubation and high-flow oxygen
Manage circulation
Open the IV/IO access and administer IV fluid rapidly
and generously

*Adrenaline IV is administrated only by experienced
specialists!
To prevent delayed and late reactions, administer:
HYDROCORTISONE 200 mg IM or slowly IV
CHLORPYRAMINE 20 mg IM or slowly IV

FIGURE !. Anaphylaxis Algorithm (adapted from ERC)

SOURCES
1.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115–51.
2.
Tintinalli JE, O. John Ma, Yealy D, Meckler GD, J. Stephan Stapczynski, Cline DM,
Thomas SH. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide. 9th ed.
New York: McGraw Hill Education; 2020.

3. 4. Anaphylaxis

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Follow the ABCDE
approach

101

102

3. %. ACUTE BRONCHOSPASM

Mate Lerga

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

In acute respiratory failure, one of the most common physical findings
alongside dyspnoea and tachypnoea is wheezing. It occurs with prolonged airflow, through narrowed central and distal airways. It is more
pronounced during exhalation, unlike in cases of upper respiratory
tract obstruction when stridor is more pronounced during inspiration.
Airway obstruction can occur due to bronchial muscle contraction (bronchospasm), smooth muscle hypertrophy, increased mucus
secretion, and/or peribronchial inflammation. Wheezing is usually associated with lower airway diseases such as asthma or other obstructive pulmonary diseases, primarily chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Paradoxically, patients with severe airflow obstruction may not have audible wheezing, the so-called trapped lung syndrome. Approach to patient, diagnosis, and treatment differ depending on the underlying disease and the obstruction/spasm site. The
most common diseases that lead to bronchospasm are asthma and
COPD. Wheezing is also very common in heart failure (elderly patients
without a history of asthma present with other symptoms and signs
of heart failure). Other conditions that can manifest by wheezing and
mimic asthma are presented in Table 1.
3.%.!. ASTHMA
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder characterised by increased reversible airway reactivity that can occur in people sensitive

103

104

TABLE !. Differential diagnosis of wheezing (retrieved and adapted from Tintinalli’s
Emergency Medicine, 9th edition, 2020)
Angioedema: allergic, ACEi, idiopathic
Upper airway
(more likely stridor, may be difficult to
distinguish from wheezing)

Foreign body
Infection: croup, epiglottitis, tracheitis
Asthma
Transient airway hyperractivity (caused by
infection or irritation)

Lower airway

Bronchiolitis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Foreigh body

Cardiovascular causes

Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (“cardiac
asthma”)
Pulmonary embolism (rarely)

Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (ARDS)
Psychogenic

If patients with acute asthma attacks have SpO2 < 92%, it is
necessary to perform arterial blood gas analysis due to the risk of
hypercapnia. Specifically, in acute asthma attacks, ventilation is
stimulated, usually resulting in a decrease in the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (PaCO2) in arterial blood. Therefore, normal, or slightly
elevated PaCO- (e.g., > 42 mmHg) indicates extreme airway obstruction and fatigue.
The aim of the oxygen therapy is to titrate the oxygen flow and
concentration to target SpO' of 94–98%.
THERAPY:
1.
Salbutamol (5 mg in a nebuliser) is the standard of asthma
therapy (in acute exacerbations). The dose can be repeated
every 15–20 minutes. The oxygen/air flow on the nebuliser must
be at least 6 L/min. If the patient does not breathe sufficiently,
the nebulised drug will not be delivered adequately.
2.
Nebulised anticholinergics (ipratropium bromide 0.5 mg) can
produce an additional bronchodilating effect.
3.
The use of systemic corticosteroids is also useful.
MAGNESIUM
In severe asthma, intravenous administration of magnesium (2 g in
slow infusion) may also be useful. The side effects are nausea, fatigue, headache, and hypotension.
AMINOPHYLLINE
There is no evidence of benefit from aminophylline compared with
standard therapy. However, if it is decided to give it (in the presence
of an experienced specialist), administer it at a dose of 5 mg/kg for
20–30 min, then with an infusion at a dose of 500–700 3g/kg/h.
FLUID THERAPY
It is used in patients who are dehydrated or have hypovolaemia.
Caution: beta-2 agonists and corticosteroids may cause
hypokalaemia.
PATIENT MONITORING
If the patient does not respond to the initial therapy and develops
signs of life-threatening asthma, intensive care is required. Sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between severe life-threatening
asthma and anaphylaxis. If patients have asthma-like symptoms and
do not have previously known asthma or COPD, we treat them as if
the cause was anaphylaxis.

105
3. 5. Acute bronchospasm

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

to numerous stimuli. It leads to recurrent episodes of shortness of
breath, chest tightness, and coughing, especially at night or early
in the morning. A common clinical finding is wheezing in the chest.
However, the severity of the wheezing does not correspond to the severity of the obstruction. Attacks often start accompanied by a feeling
of tightness in the chest and a cough. As the exacerbation progresses, wheezing becomes audible, the exhalation is prolonged, and the
use of auxiliary respiratory muscles can occur. Acute asthma attacks
are reversible and regress spontaneously or within minutes to hours
of therapy with symptom-free intervals between seizures. Despite
this, many patients with asthma develop chronic airway obstruction.
The findings of the physical examination vary widely, from
coughing and wheezing at the end of the expiration in patients with
mild attacks to respiratory distress in patients with severe asthma
attacks. Sometimes wheezing can be heard without a stethoscope. A
change in mental status (e.g., lethargy, exhaustion, agitation, or confusion) is a serious warning about a potential respiratory arrest. The
“silent chest” reflects a very serious obstruction in which airflow is
insufficient to cause audible wheezing. The finding of hypercapnia is
an extremely unfavourable sign in this group of patients.

106

TABLE 2. Severity of asthma exacerbation (retrieved from Adult Advanced Life Support
Course Manual published by the European Resuscitation Council, 2015)

Near-fatal asthma

Elevated PaCO- and/or requiring mechanical ventilation with
increased inflation pressures
Any of the following in patients with a severe form of the
disease:

Life-threatening asthma

Clinical signs

Measurements

altered conscious level

PEF <33%

exhaustion

SpO-<92%

arrhythmia

PaO-<8 kPa

hypotension

“normal” PaCO- (4.6-6.0
kPa)

cyanosis
silent chest
poor expiratory effort

Acute severe asthma

Moderate asthma
exacerbation

Brittle asthma

Any of the following:
— PEF 33–50%
— respiratory rate > 25/min
— heart rate > 110/min
— inability to complete sentences in one breath
1. increasing symptoms
2. PEF > 50–70%
3. no signs of acute severe asthma
TYPE 1: wide PEF variability (> 40% diurnal variation for >
50% of the time over a period of > 150 days) despite
intense therapy
TYPE 2: sudden severe attacks on a background of apparently well-controlled asthma

3. %. 2. CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by
persistent airflow disturbances that are progressive and associated
with an impaired inflammatory response to numerous harmful particles in the inhaled air. COPD has two main forms: chronic bronchitis
and emphysema, which, however, often occur together, so the traditional classification is of limited clinical significance.
Chronic bronchitis is defined by the presence of a chronic productive cough for 3 months in two consecutive years, excluding other
causes of chronic cough. Emphysema results from the destruction of

CHRONIC THERAPY
1.
Pharmacotherapy: does not affect the progression of the disease,
but leads to a decrease in symptoms, reduces the frequency of exacerbations, and improves the quality of life.
a)
Inhaled long-acting 42-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids.
b)
Theophylline: adjunctive therapy, inhibits phosphodiesterase and
has an anti-inflammatory effect. Reserved for a limited number of
cases.
c)
Mobilisation of secretions: stimulated by abundant oral fluid intake
and humidification of the room. Limit the use of antihistamines, antitussives, mucolytics, and decongestants. Expectorants are of no
clear benefit.
2.
Smoking cessation: the only intervention that can reduce loss of
lung function and mortality from respiratory causes.
3.
Pulmonary rehabilitation: can improve exercise capacity and
quality of life and is recommended for patients with moderate to
severe COPD.
4.
Vaccinations against pneumococcus and influenza are key to combating acute infections.
5.
Oxygen (home oxygen therapy): long-term oxygen therapy reduces
COPD mortality, and the goal is to increase the basic arterial
oxygen partial pressure (PaO') to ) 8 kPa or arterial oxygen saturation (SaO') to ) 90% at rest.
3. %. 2. !. ACUTE EXACERBATIONS OF COPD
Acute exacerbations of COPD are characterised by worsening respiratory symptoms beyond normal daily variations and are usually caused by
infection (over 75%) or tracheobronchial tree irritation (cold weather, hypoxia, narcotics, sedatives). Acute exacerbations of COPD are primarily
due to mismatches of ventilation and perfusion rather than the limitation
of expiratory airflow seen in acute asthma attacks. The clinical presentation is dominated by hypoxaemia (tachypnea, tachycardia, systemic hypertension, cyanosis, and changes in mental status) with CO' retention
and the development of respiratory acidosis. Diseases such as pneumonia, pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, congestive heart failure (CHF),
or acute abdomen can cause exacerbation of COPD.

107
3. 5. Acute bronchospasm

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Asthma severity

the bronchioles and alveoli.
Obstruction of the lower respiratory tract causes expiratory wheezing, especially during maximum forced expiration and prolonged expiration. In the early stages, arterial blood analysis reveals mild to moderate
hypoxaemia without hypercapnia. As COPD progresses, hypoxaemia
becomes more severe, and hypercapnia develops. Arterial oxygenation
worsens during acute exacerbations, exercise, and sleep. Clinical signs
include swelling of facial blood vessels due to secondary polycythaemia
and tremor, somnolence and confusion due to hypercarbia, and right
heart failure.

108

3. %. 2. 2. THERAPY FOR ACUTE EXACERBATIONS
The objectives of treatment are reversible bronchospasm relief,
tissue oxygenation correction, and treatment of the underlying cause
of exacerbation.
1.
Oxygen +/- mechanical ventilation: the goal is to correct PaO'
> 8.0 kPa or SaO' 88–92% with CAUTION and monitoring of
PaCO' so that hypercapnia does not occur. Oxygen therapy increases the ventilation-perfusion mismatch (hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction) and leads to reduced haemoglobin affinity
for CO' (Haldane effect). Choosing aids for oxygen delivery and
avoiding too high oxygen content are actions crucial for preventing the development of respiratory acidosis. If adequate
oxygenation is not achieved and/or respiratory acidosis develops, assisted ventilation, primarily non-invasive, is required. In
the case of inadequate response and/or further deterioration,
invasive mechanical ventilation is required. Non-invasive ventilation provides a better outcome in terms of lower intubation
rates, lower mortality rates, and shorter duration of hospitalisation (Table 4 and Table 5).
2.
Pharmacotherapy: short-acting 42-agonists and anticholinergics are the first-line treatment for acute severe COPD
exacerbation.
3.
Corticosteroids: systemic administration for 5–7 days leads to
improvement in lung function and hypoxaemia.
4.
Antibiotics: administered if infection is suspected (change in
volume and appearance of sputum). The most common causes
are S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis. Choice of
antibiotics: macrolides, tetracyclines, or amoxicillin with/without
clavulanic acid.

TABLE 3. Differential diagnosis of acute exacerbation of COPD (retrieved and adapted from
Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine, 9th edition, 2020)
Diagnosis

Clinical presentation

Caution

Earlier onset
Different symptoms
Family history
Reversible airflow

Can coexist with COPD.
Many patients diagnosed with
asthma actually have COPD
or coexisting asthma and
COPD.

Heart failure

Presence of orthopnoea and
dyspnoea with exertion speaks in
favour of CHF
Jugular vein distention,
Hepatojugular reflux,
Bibasilar rales,
Chest X-ray: cardiomegaly and/or
interstitial oedema
BNP < 100 pg/mL not likely to be
CHF
BNP > 500 pg/mL more likely to
be CHF

Can coexist with COPD.
Shares some common anamnestic features with COPD.
Multiple conditions can
falsely elevate or decrease
the BNP level.

Pulmonary
embolism

Risk factors: older age, recent
surgery or trauma, history of
thromboembolism, hereditary
thrombophilia, malignancy,
smoking, estrogen-containing
drugs. D-dimer may be useful in
ruling out PE in low-risk patients.

20–25% of patients with
severe COPD exacerbation
without an unclear trigger
have PE.
Triad of PE (pleuritic chest
pain, dyspnea, and tachycardia) plus hypoxaemia is rare.

Acute coronary
syndrome

Obtain ECG and troponin in those
with chest pain and risk factors
for ACS.

Dyspnea may be the leading
symptom in patients with
ACS.

Pneumothorax

Obtain chest X-ray, US, or CT.

COPD is a risk factor for
pneumothorax.

Obtain chest X-ray.

Frequently coexists with
COPD exacerbation

Asthma

Pneumonia

Abbreviations: ACS – acute coronary syndrome; BNP – B-type natriuretic peptide; CHF –
chronic heart failure; CT – computed tomography; ECG – electrocardiogram; COPD – chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; PE – pulmonary thromboembolism; *odds ratio

109
3. 5. Acute bronchospasm

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

A patient with acute exacerbation of COPD should have arterial
blood gas analysis, venous blood tested for inflammatory markers,
blood count with blood differential test, lung ultrasound (pneumothorax), and chest X-ray with further testing depending on the clinical
presentation.

110

TABLE 4. Indications and relative contraindications for non-invasive ventilation (NIV) (retrieved
and adapted from Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine, 9th edition, 2020)

Exclusion criteria (any)

Respiratory arrest
Cardiovascular instability (hypotension, arrhythmias, heart attack)
Change in mental status; uncooperative patient
High aspiration risk
Recent facial or gastroesophageal surgery
Craniofacial trauma
Burns
Extreme obesity

Abbreviations: PaO2 – partial pressure of arterial oxygen; PaCO2 – partial pressure of arterial
carbon dioxide; SaO2 – arterial oxygen saturation.

TABLE %. Indications for intubation and mechanical ventilation (retrieved and adapted from
Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine, 9th edition, 2020)
Inability to tolerate NIVa or NIVa failure
Respiratory or cardiac arrest
Decreased consciousness or increased agitation (relative)
Massive aspiration
Persistent inability to remove respiratory secretions
Hypotension
Persistent hypoxaemia despite optimal respiratory treatment
Marked haemodynamic instability

111
3. 5. Acute bronchospasm

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

Selection criteria

Acidosis (pH < 7.36)/hypercapnia (PaCO> > 50
mmHg)/hypoxia (PaO> < 60 mmHg or SaO> <
90%)
Severe dyspnoea with clinical signs such as muscle fatigue or increased work of breathing

SOURCES
1.
Tintinalli JE, O. John Ma, Yealy D, Meckler GD, J. Stephan Stapczynski, Cline DM,
Thomas SH. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide. 9th ed.
New York: McGraw Hill Education; 2020.
2.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T et al. European Resuscitation
Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation. 2021; 161: 115–51.

112

3. &. PULMONARY OEDEMA

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

It is an emergency condition requiring immediate medical attention. It
can be cardiogenic (an increase in hydrostatic pressure) or non-cardiogenic (an increase in microvascular permeability).
If no lung injury is present, fluid flow in the intercellular space of
the lung is primarily defined by hydrostatic pressure.
3. &. !. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT: ABCDE ? SAMPLE
A (AIRWAY):
—
Possible auditory phenomena from the upper airway because of
fluid accumulation.
B (BREATHING):
—
Impaired gas exchange with subsequent hypoxia increases the
work of breathing (WOB). It manifests with accessory respiratory
muscle activation, high respiratory rate, and diaphoresis.
—
Hypoxia-caused confusion may occur.
—
Auscultatory findings: crackles, in the case of pleural effusion –
absent lung sounds.
C (CIRCULATION):
—
Signs of shock (tachycardia, initial hypertension as a product of
sympathetic activation, hypotension develops in later stages)
—
Skin is pale and clammy!

113

—

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

ECG — various findings are possible, often depending on the
underlying pathology causing pulmonary oedema.

D (DISABILITY):
—
All of the above can lead to impaired cerebral perfusion,
which can affect consciousness. Confusion, agitation, and
coma may occur.
E (EXPOSURE AND ENVIRONMENT):
—
Search for signs of heart failure (e.g., pretibial oedema indicates a probable cardiac cause).
SAMPLE — symptoms: dyspnoea, orthopnoea, weakness, etc. Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema is usually preceded by chronic heart
failure (of various causes). Non-cardiogenic oedema is more probable with a history of traffic accidents, infections, fever, etc.
NON2CARDIOGENIC PULMONARY OEDEMA
Encompasses all clinical states promoting increased vascular permeability in the lungs resulting in an inflow of liquid and proteins in
the interstitial and alveolar space.
Causes of increased permeability:
—
Direct injury (gastric fluid aspiration, pneumonia).
—
States promoting acute capillary endothelial injury — systemic infections (sepsis), burns, trauma – they cause ALI (acute
lung injury) and ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome).
CONSEQUENCES:
—
Respiratory failure (primarily type 1, progression to type 1 +
type 2 in severe forms).
TREATMENT:
—
Treatment of the primary cause.
—
Supportive treatment.
—
Mechanical ventilation.
CARDIOGENIC PULMONARY OEDEMA
If there is an underlying heart disease and it progresses or is left
untreated, pulmonary oedema may occur at some stage (e.g., valvular defects, cardiomyopathies, etc.). Rarely it may happen due to
other causes (e.g., volume overload, metabolic diseases, uncontrolled arterial hypertension).
Typically, patients present with progressive dyspnoea. They
are seated in the upright position, hoarse crackles are audible,
they are tachypnoeic, and peripheral saturation is low with evident
use of accessory respiratory muscles. Heart rate is usually rapid,
the skin is diaphoretic, cold, and pale. Capillary refill time is prolonged. Blood pressure is usually elevated. The 12-lead ECG may

show various pathological findings, such as ischaemia, rhythm abnormalities, and more. In advanced stages, altered and reduced levels of
consciousness can be expected.
The purpose of this text is not to describe all possible pathological cardiac states that can lead to heart failure, but to present the most
typical presentation and its treatment. The primary cause that leads to
this presentation is left ventricle systolic failure. Because of a reduced
ejection fraction, the LVEDP (left ventricular end-diastolic pressure)
rises and fluid retention occurs. This increases high hydrostatic
pressure in blood vessels and fills the alveoli with transudate (large
amounts lead to pulmonary effusion).
When the alveoli are filled with fluid, it is difficult for oxygen to
reach the capillary bed, and because of reduced systolic function,
blood delivery to the organs is compromised.
BASIC PRINCIPLES — TREATMENT OF CARDIOGENIC OEDEMA
A (AIRWAY) AND B (BREATHING):
—
Apply oxygen therapy if the patient is fully conscious and peripheral saturation is lower than 90%.
—
In the case of inadequate response of a fully alert patient to
oxygen therapy and peripheral saturation < 90% or PaO' < 8 kPa
with a respiratory rate of 25/min and over, non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) should be considered.
—
Endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation are
suitable for patients with life-threatening hypoxia and/or altered
level of consciousness.
C (CIRCULATION):
—
High-dose loop diuretics with monitoring of urine output (caution
— Hypokalaemia).
—
E.g., intravenous furosemide — the decision about initial dosing
depends on the patient’s chronic intake and dosage. If a new-onset acute heart failure occurs, the initial dose is a bolus of 40
mg IV, and the subsequent doses are adjusted depending on
the diuretic response. In the case of acutely decompensated
chronic heart failure (which is more common), patients often take
doses as high as 125–250–500 mg daily (furosemide has a high
therapeutic range). Repeating the chronic dose does not always
result in expected or significant urine output, so repeated doses
are necessary. Luckily, we can monitor the response by placing
a urinary catheter and measuring urine output. Relief in symptoms is also a good sign of appropriate dosage. Always treat the
patient, never the numbers.
—
Nitrates or nitroprusside (contraindicated if the systolic blood
pressure is below 110 mmHg), continuous intravenous infusion is
the preferred route of administration (via perfusion pump).
—
E.g., nitroglycerine (nitrate) at a dosage of 5–40 3g/min (fast

115
3. 6. Pulmonary oedema

114

116

D (DISABILITY):
—
Morphine — intravenous administration, anxiolysis, enhances
oxygen delivery to the myocardium (indirectly reduces sympathetic activity, tachycardia, and hypertension) and can increase
the compliance of a patient with non-invasive ventilation.
—
Dosage — initially 2–4 mg IV, followed by further doses of 2 mg IV
until the expected clinical response occurs (cooperative, calm). In
the case of overdose — administer naloxone!
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
It is a condition defined as inadequate tissue perfusion following heart
failure, and after excluding hypovolaemia as a possible cause. It is the
most advanced stage of acutely decompensated heart failure (it happens in less than 2% of all cases).
CHARACTERISTICS:
1.
Systolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg (or a drop in MAP greater
than 30 mmHg).
2.
Heart rate over 60.
3.
Oliguria.
4.
Signs of organ congestion may or may not be present.
The most common cause is acute decompensation of a previously known heart failure. It occurs rarely in patients with previously
normal heart function/unknown heart disease (e.g., massive myocardial
infarction).

SOURCES
1.
Deranged Physiology [Internet, cited 12.12.2022]. Available from: https://derangedphysiology.com/main/home
2.
McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, Gardner RS, Baumbach A, Böhm M et al.. 2021
ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur
Heart J. 2021; 42(36): 3599–726.

117
3. 6. Pulmonary oedema

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

—

onset and offset; should be carefully titrated for the desired clinical effect; avoid hypotension). It significantly decreases afterload.
Inotropes in a continuous intravenous infusion (e.g., dobutamine,
enoximone, adrenaline, levosimendan) — numerous adverse
effects, indicated only when the systolic blood pressure is below
90 mmHg. Do not do it alone — seek expert help!

118

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac, Ivan 0eveljevi+
3. '. MECHANICAL VENTILATION SNIPPETS

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

The first ventilators, so-called iron lungs, were used during the polio
pandemic. The patient was placed in a chamber that generated cyclical negative pressure, mimicking the respiratory cycle, and enabling
mechanical ventilation. This is physiologically very similar to our natural breathing, where the respiratory muscles create negative pressure
and literally suck air into the lungs. Such ventilators had an advantage
because of this similarity. However, there were many pitfalls, the first
of which was that the patient was trapped in the chamber, making
access very difficult and worsening the quality of life. Advances in
modern medicine have resulted in positive pressure ventilators used
today. The main principle is the generation of positive pressure that
“pushes” the air into the lungs, which is opposite to normal breathing.
The aim of mechanical ventilation is to bypass the period in
which various reversible clinical states make spontaneous breathing inadequate (e.g., traumatic brain injury requiring deep sedation,
severe COVID-19 pneumonia, septic shock, haemorrhagic shock,
etc.). Such patients would not survive without mechanical ventilation.
Invasive mechanical ventilation is applied if a patient is endotracheally intubated, and non-invasive mechanical ventilation is
applied in a fully alert patient and is contraindicated in an altered
state of consciousness.
Intubated patient in the early stages of treatment is usually
sedated and does not breathe spontaneously. In later phases, when

119

120

The above-mentioned recommendations are a result of multiple studies designed to find optimal ventilation settings to reduce
complications of mechanical ventilation (which, don’t forget, is not a
physiological way of breathing). We call that ventilator-induced lung
injury, which has different underlying mechanisms.
1.
Volutrauma — lung damage following mechanical ventilation
with inappropriately high volumes.
2.
Atelectrauma — lung damage when an insufficient amount
of PEEP is delivered. PEEP-less alveoli are prone to collapse
at the end of each expiration and then reopen on inspiration.
Cyclical closing/opening results in damaged alveoli, which are
further prone to collapse and are unable to reopen, reducing
the total alveolar surface needed for effective gas exchange.
3.
Barotrauma — lung damage caused by excessive pressures in
the lungs.
4.
Biotrauma — lung damage caused by the release of proinflammatory mediators, oxygen radicals, etc.
Ventilators are equipped with different ventilation modes,
some of which are brand-specific and patent-protected.

The two main modes are:
a)
Volume-controlled mode — volume is guaranteed with each
breath, ignoring the pressure required to deliver that volume
(CAUTION – possible high pressures and barotrauma).
b)
Pressure-controlled mode – a breath is delivered at a fixed time
and constant pressure (gentler on the lungs; CAUTION – must
be closely monitored, high risk of completely inadequate tidal
volumes).
For those who want to know more — modern ventilators usually
combine those two modes for volume-guaranteed, pressure-regulated breaths. In emergency settings, with a transport ventilator, the
mode selection is usually very limited, and we rarely choose pressure
modes because of poor conditions for close monitoring.
Non-invasive ventilation is usually performed via the CPAP
mode. By setting the PEEP value, this mode delivers a continuous
positive pressure in the airway and alveoli, thus preventing collapse.
When a patient has inadequately low tidal volume, pressure support
(PS) may be added to supplement each breath with additional pressure, which ensures normal tidal volume. Non-invasive ventilation can
be used in COPD exacerbation, pulmonary oedema, pneumonia, etc.
Synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is the
most important invasive ventilation mode on a transport ventilator.
It is appropriate for all sedated or comatose patients without spontaneous breathing effort. The advantage of SIMV (compared with
others such as CMV) is that it still allows occasional spontaneous
TABLE !. Basic settings of mechanical ventilation medical emergencies
NON — INVASIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION

INVASIVE MECHANICAL
VENTILATION

Mode

CPAP

SIMV/MMV

Tidal volume (Vt)

Patient-dependent variable,
if a spontaneous breath volume is lower than 6–8 mL/kg
IBW, set the PS to achieve 6
mL/kg IBW. PS — 2–8 cmH-O

Respiratory rate (RR)

Patient-dependent

Depends on the CO- value,
initially 12–20/min

Positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP)

4–8 cmH-O, if the setting
does not suit the patient,
they usually complain.

4A15 cmH-O
At least 4, higher if needed
(15 cmH-O max).
Suspected intracranial
bleeding — never above 4
cmH-O!

Inspiration/expiration
ratio (I:E)

Patient-dependent

I:E 1:2 (in the case of COPD
or asthma, 1:2.5 or 1:3).

Pressure limit (Ppeak
limit)

Set the Ppeak limit at 35
cmH-O.

Set the Ppeak limit at 35
cmH-O.

Vt 6–8 mL/kg IBW
PS is also adjustable to provide support in the case of a
spontaneous breath.
PS — 2–8 cmH-O

121
3. 7. Mechanical ventilation snippets

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

the favourable clinical effect is present, a clinician reduces the level
of mandatory breaths and increases the level of spontaneous (albeit
usually still supported) breaths. There is a plethora of ventilation
modes to achieve this. Non-invasive ventilation is applied via continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) masks that fit tightly on the patient’s face, providing a seal to prevent air leakage. The patient must
be fully awake and cooperative. It is most commonly used in patients
with severe respiratory failure after an unsuccessful attempt at
oxygen therapy. Sometimes it can be a first-line therapy, e.g., in a
COPD exacerbation with acutely elevated CO'.
Whether we use a transport ventilator or a stationary one, the
basic principles and setup are the same. This chapter discusses
ONLY the initial setup in emergency settings outside the ICU and
does not go into detail.
The basic settings of lung-protective mechanical ventilation
are as follows:
1.
F1O' — desired oxygen percentage in the inspired air mixture
(21–100%, initially can be set up to 100% but only for a short
period; it is important to titrate it adequately, e.g., reduce it to
target SpO' values and avoid hyperoxia, 40–60% is usually
sufficient).
2.
Tidal volume (Vt) 6–8 mL/kg of ideal body weight (IBW).
3.
Set up frequency (f) to ensure adequate CO' removal.
4.
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) — setup depends on
the disease, 4–15 cmH'O.
5.
Avoid plateau pressure (Pplat) higher than 30 cmH'O (set the
Ppeak limit at 35 cmH'O).

122

IN SHORT, MECHANICAL VENTILATION IN EMERGENCY
SETTINGS IN THE FOLLOWING SITUATIONS:
a)
When patients require analgaesia and sedation and have inadequate breathing/respiration due to the effect of the drugs.
b)
In respiratory arrest.
c)
In severe respiratory failure and increased WOB.
If a patient has low saturation and low PaO' (if available), better
oxygenation is achieved through optimal PEEP settings. PEEP prevents alveolar collapse and increases the gas exchange area. If CO'
elimination is deranged and/or in the case of small tidal volumes accompanied by high respiratory rate and accessory respiratory muscle
activation, adding the PS (in non-invasive ventilation) or adjusting Vt
and I:E ratio (in invasive ventilation) may further help.

SOURCES
1.
Deranged Physiology [Internet, cited 12.12.2022]. Available from: https://derangedphysiology.com/main/home
2.
West JB, Luks AM. West’s Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials, 11th ed. Wolters
Kluwer; 2021.
3.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network; Brower RG, Matthay MA, Morris A,
Schoenfeld D, Thompson BT, Wheeler A. Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000; 342(18): 1301–8.
4.
Hess D, Kacmarek RM. Essentials of Mechanical Ventilation, 4th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education; 2019.

123
3. 7. Mechanical ventilation snippets

Part 3: Respiratory emergencies

breaths, thus reducing asynchrony between the patient and the ventilator. Asynchrony can lead to desaturation, elevated CO' levels, lung
damage, and an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), which should
be avoided at all costs. In emergency settings, it usually happens due
to inadequate dosing of sedatives and/or muscle relaxants.

124

PART 3: RESPIRATORY EMERGENCIES
Stick to the ABCDEs!

Keypoints

Acute respiratory failure — happens either as a breathing failure by itself or
following other disorders in the body — know the difference.

Part 4: Sudden neurological
deterioration

Oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve — not a linear relationship, resulting
in a possible significant drop in PaO- for a relatively “small” drop in SpO-.
Oxygen therapy — use only when indicated.
— Low SpO-/SaO— Pending airway closure (e.g. anaphylaxis)
— Significant blood loss (trauma, hypovolaemic shock)
FiO- is the oxygen “dose”!
ABG analysis will rarely give you the cause of the state but will inform you
on the severity. Therefore, you should always look at the patient and think
clinically!
Use the stepwise approach.
When the metabolic part is the cause of the problem — don’t forget about the
SID/gap!
In anaphylaxis, give adrenalin 0.5 mg IM as soon as possible, administer
oxygen, call for help, secure the airway and open large bore IV line to give
fluids FAST!
When treating either acute asthma or COPD exacerbation — administer
oxygen, bronchodilators via a nebulizer and give corticosteroids! Be extra
careful with oxygen therapy in COPD patients!
Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema requires prompt treatment:
— Oxygen. Consider NIV if the patient is fully alert and in severe distress!
— High-dose loop diuretics! Beware of hypokalaemia.
— Nitrates/nitroprusside iv. continuously if the blood pressure allows.
— SEEK EXPERT HELP before administering inotropes (they sound good in
theory but come with a lot of unwanted effects!)
— Morphine — to reduce sympathetic activity (in this case — NOT for pain)
Learn about non-invasive mechanical ventilation — it can help you save lives!

125—144

126

4. !. SUDDEN NEUROLOGICAL DETERIORATION

Janja Tar1ukovi+

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

Sudden neurological deterioration is a common reason for patient admission to emergency medical services. It can be caused by various
critical illnesses or injuries. Prompt treatment is essential to limit secondary brain injury and improve patient outcome. Primary injury is the
initial brain damage caused by a critical illness or injury. Regardless
of the cause, primary injury triggers secondary injury, which can lead
to further brain damage. Our management can affect secondary brain
damage through interventions that address hypoxia, hypotension,
and increased intracranial pressure.
4. !. !. CAUSES OF SUDDEN NEUROLOGICAL DETERIORATION
AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
NEUROLOGICAL CAUSES
—
Ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke.
—
Traumatic brain injury (TBI; the morphological substrate spanning from epidural haematoma, subdural haematoma, brain
contusions to diffuse axonal injury, and brain oedema).
—
brain tumours, etc.
SYSTEMIC CAUSES
—
Infection (septic encephalopathy, central nervous system (CNS)
infection in the form of meningitis and/or encephalitis).

127

128

—

—
—
—

4. !. 2. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT:
ABCDE ? SAMPLE
A (AIRWAY):
—
Check the airway patency as CNS depression may cause partial
or complete loss of airway patency. Noisy breathing/snoring and
asynchronous movement of the chest and abdomen are signs
of partial obstruction, while complete obstruction is silent with
visible accessory respiratory muscles involvement and see-saw
phenomenon for a brief period before the patient goes into
cardiac arrest.
—
In suspected trauma, place the cervical spine stabilisation.
—
Aspirate any blood or gastric content from the airway, if present.
—
Use simple airway opening manoeuvres (head-tilt chin-lift or
jaw-thrust) or oro-/nasopharyngeal airway to secure the airway
if it is not patent.
—
Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are indicated
in patients with GCS 5 8, as they may lose protective airway reflexes and develop hypoventilation with resultant hypercapnia,
which worsens intracranial hypertension. However, advanced
techniques for securing the airway, including the use of anaesthetic and neuromuscular blocking drugs, should only be performed by experienced personnel, as failed attempts of tracheal
intubation can worsen secondary brain injury.
B (BREATHING):
—
Assess breathing using the “look, listen, and feel” approach to
evaluate respiratory rate and effort, breath and added sounds,
and chest movement symmetry, as well as breathing patterns
associated with different causes of decreased consciousness,
such as Cheyne-Stokes and Kussmaul breathing. Look for possible causes leading to hypoxia, such as subcutaneous emphysema, tracheal deviation, and jugular vein distention.
—
Monitor oxygen saturation (SpO') continuously using a pulse oximeter and end-expiratory CO' (EtCO'), if available.
—
Administer oxygen if SpO' is below 90%.
—
Ensure adequate oxygenation at all times to prevent secondary
brain injury and maintain blood oxygen saturation above 90%.

—

If the patient has insufficient minute ventilation and oxygenation,
even after opening the airway and administering oxygen therapy,
start with manual ventilation using the tight-fitting face mask and
self-inflating bag (e.g., Ambu bag) and consider anaesthesia and
tracheal intubation if experienced in the procedure. Insufficient
minute ventilation can be expected in bradypnoeic patients, for
instance, those overdosed with opioids or with imminent brainstem herniation, and patients with respiratory muscle fatigue,
such as those with acute respiratory insufficiency.

C (CIRCULATION):
—
Assess heart rate, blood pressure, capillary refill time, skin colour,
and (hourly) urine output, and monitor these parameters every 3–5
minutes. Look for patterns that might indicate the cause of sudden
neurological deterioration, such as Cushing's triad.
—
Place continuous ECG monitoring.
—
Hypotension, along with hypoxia, is a major contributor to secondary brain injury (CPP=MAP(ICP, where CPP is cerebral perfusion pressure, MAP is mean arterial pressure, and ICP is intracranial pressure).
—
In the initial management of a patient with neurological deterioration, aim for systolic blood pressure of above 110 mmHg (or MAP
above 70 mmHg) to achieve adequate brain perfusion.
—
If blood pressure is below the target values, consider administering:
a) volume resuscitation with 0.9% sodium chloride (or hypertonic
sodium chloride), as this is the crystalloid solution with osmolarity
similar to or higher than the human plasma and will not worsen
brain oedema.
b) vasoconstrictors, such as noradrenaline, 0.01–0.5 3g/kg/min IV,
dose titrated up to target blood pressure with regular blood pressure assessments.
—
Once IV access is established, obtain blood samples for testing,
including complete blood count (CBC), glucose, sodium, potassium, and coagulation tests; with additional tests such as C-reactive
protein (CRP), procalcitonin, urea, creatinine, ammonium, liver
enzymes, ABG, etc., added depending on the differential diagnosis.
D (DISABILITY/OTHER ACUTE CONSIDERATIONS):
—
Before performing the neurological assessment, correct hypoxia
and hypotension as they can cause or contribute to the depth of
decreased consciousness.
—
Begin by assessing blood glucose level, Glasgow Coma Score
(GCS), pupillary size, symmetry, and light response. Check for differences in motor response between the left and right side, and
perform a targeted neurological examination to look for signs of
increased intracranial pressure, meningeal irritation, and subtle
myoclonus such as eyelid fasciculation, as well as evidence of previous seizure: lateral tongue biting, uncontrolled urination, etc.).

129
4. 1. Sudden neurological deterioration

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

—

Organ system failure (e.g., shock, renal failure, hepatic failure,
hypoxaemia and/or hypercarbia due to respiratory failure).
Endocrine disorders (hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, thyroid
dysfunction, Addison crisis, etc.).
Electrolyte and acid-base disorders (hypo- or hypernatraemia,
hypercalcaemia, hypophophytaemia, etc.).
Drugs/poisoning (narcotics, benzodiazepines, CO poisoning)
Hypo- and hyperthermia.

130

—

—
—
—
—

TABLE !. Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
Behaviour

Eye opening

Verbal response

Motor response

Response

Score

Spontaneously

4

To speech

3

To pain

2

No response

1

1.

Oriented (in time, space, and towards person)

5

Confused, disoriented

4

2.
3.

Inappropriate words

3

Incomprehensible sounds

2

No response

1

Obeys command

6

Localises pain

5

Withdraws to painful stimulus

4

Abnormal flexion (decortication)

3

A

Abnormal extension (decerebration)

2

M

No response

1

—
—

4.
—

S

Assess breathing pattern, which can help with diagnosing the
depth and cause of comatose state (e.g., Cheyne-Stokes breathing, bradypnoea, irregular breathing, Kussmaul breathing).
Assess plantar and deep tendon reflexes – useful when there is
an asymmetry in motor response between the left and the right
side of the body.
Assess brain stem reflexes, e.g., pupillary, corneal, oculovestibular (doll’s eye movement); suction from the trachea (useful if brain
death is suspected).
HYPOGLYCAEMIA: hypoglycaemia is a common and easily
treatable cause of a comatose state. If present, administering
glucose is an absolute priority, ideally in high concentration (e.g.,
40% glucose), titrated up to recovery of consciousness and
adequate blood glucose levels. If rapid glucose testing is not
available in a patient with sudden neurological deterioration, then
50 mL of 40% glucose should be administered, as the potential
benefit of treating hypoglycaemia outweighs the potential risk
associated with hyperglycaemia.
SEIZURES: repeated or prolonged seizures add substantially to
secondary brain injury and should be stopped immediately. Administer IV benzodiazepines.
SIGNS OF ELEVATED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE: For example,
decreased consciousness with present anisocoria or dilated unresponsive pupils, Cushing's triad, etc. Administer the following:
mannitol 0.5–1 g/kg IV +/- furosemide 20 mg IV (before applying
this therapy, place a urinary catheter)
consider hyperventilation (shortly)
elevation of the head of the bed to 15–30° (increases venous
drainage and decreases ICP)
if adequately trained for the administration of anaesthetics, give
analgaesia and sedation and proceed with tracheal intubation
and mechanical ventilation of the patient.
DRUG OVERDOSE: if available, administer an antidote (e.g., naloxone in opiate overdose, flumazenil in benzodiazepine overdose, etc.).
SAMPLE:
(Signs/symptoms): Obtain information from any witness present.
How did the acute deterioration develop – over several minutes,
hours? Did the patient complain of any other symptoms before
the acute neurological deterioration, such as headache, vomiting, fever, etc.?
(Allergies): Does the patient have any known allergies or hypersensitivity to medications or other substances?
(Medications): Inquire about any medications the patient is
taking, with special emphasis on antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy, psychiatric therapy, insulin, oral antidiabetic medications, and antiepileptic therapy. This information can guide

131
4. 1. Sudden neurological deterioration

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

—
—

Normal pupils are equal in size (symmetric), reactive to light, and
range 2–8 mm in diameter. Any finding outside of these norms,
such as asymmetry or decreased responsiveness to light stimuli,
is considered pathological in suddenly deteriorated neurological
status and can help in making a differential diagnosis.
Targeted neurological examination includes the following:
GCS: assesses the patient's ability to open their eyes, vocalise, and
move their limbs. If the patient is awake, assess their orientation. If
the patient does not respond to verbal command, apply a painful
stimulus (e.g., by pinching the trapezius muscle, supraorbital ridge,
or temporomandibular joint), and assess the best motor response,
as well as the difference in motor response between the left and
the right side of the body.

132

P

E

SOURCES
1.
Pinsky MR, Broachard L, Hedenstierna G, Antonelli M. Applied Physiology in
Intensive Care Medicine 1. 3rd ed. Springer; 2012.
2.
Gupta A, Gelb A, Duane D, Adapa R. Gupta and Gelb’s Essentials of
Neuroanesthesia and Neurointensive Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge University
Press; 2018.
3.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed.
Elsevier; 2023.
4.
Chieregato A, Fitzgerald M. Traumatic Brain Injury. 2nd ed. European Society
of Intensive Care Medicine – Patient-Centered Acute Care Training; 2013.
5.
Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Leslie K, Wiener-Kronish JP.
Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
6.
Lulla A et al. Prehospital Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Brain
Injury – 3rd edition. Prehosp Emerg Care 2023; 27(5): 507-38.

133
4. 1. Sudden neurological deterioration

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

L

treatment decisions and help prevent adverse effects.
(Past illnesses): Ask about recent surgeries, infections, and
other comorbidities. Is there a family history of psychiatric disorders or other relevant conditions?
(Last oral intake): If less than six hours have passed since the
last meal, they are at a higher risk of regurgitation and aspiration
of gastric contents during procedures such as analgosedation
and tracheal intubation. Follow the rapid sequence intubation
protocol if these procedures are planned.
(Events leading up to present illness/injury): Look for any empty
medication containers or bottles near the patient. Are there
any signs that this is a suicide attempt or intentional overdose?
Gathering this information can help guide treatment decisions
and prevent future occurrences.

134

4. 2. SEIZURES

Jan Maroevi+, Janja Tar1ukovi+

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

4. 2. !. INTRODUCTION
Seizures are caused by abnormal electrical impulses in the brain that
disrupt normal brain function, resulting in acute neurological deterioration. This can manifest as decreased consciousness and focal
or generalised involuntary movements. Diagnosis is usually based
on clinical presentation, laboratory findings, electroencephalogram
(EEG), and imaging studies such as CT or MRI of the brain. Treatment
involves identifying and addressing the underlying cause, administering anticonvulsant drugs, and in some cases, surgical intervention.
Overall, understanding the causes and types of seizures is
crucial for the effective diagnosis and management of patients with
seizure disorders. As medical professionals, it is important to have a
thorough understanding of the conditions to provide optimal care for
our patients.
Seizures can be classified into different types, including:
—
Epilepsy (epileptic convulsive disorder) – a chronic brain disorder characterised by recurrent seizures that are not caused by a
reversible factor.
—
Symptomatic epilepsy – seizures due to a known reason, such
as brain tumour, TBI, stroke, etc.
—
Non-epileptic seizures – seizures caused by a temporary systemic disorder that interferes with normal brain function, e.g.,
electrolyte disorders, hyperthermia, etc.

135

136

4. 2. 2. TREATMENT
Effective management of seizures requires attention to both general measures and drug therapy. One of the most critical aspects
of management is securing the airway to ensure adequate airflow.
For example, in patients with generalised tonic-clonic seizures, it is
important to clear the area around the neck to prevent compression
from clothing. Attempting to remove the patient's tongue should be
avoided, as this can result in injury to the rescuer's fingers, as well
as injury to the patient. Patients should be turned to their left side
to decrease the risk of aspiration in the case of vomiting. If a generalised motor seizure occurs, immediate administration of medication is indicated.
There are three lines of drug treatment for seizures. The firstline drugs include benzodiazepines such as midazolam, lorazepam,

and diazepam. In prehospital settings, midazolam can be administered intramuscularly (0.2 mg/kg to a maximum of 10 mg), intranasally (0.2 mg/kg to a maximum of 5 mg), or buccally (0.5 mg/kg to a
maximum of 10 mg). Buccal administration of lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg to
a maximum of 4 mg) or rectal administration of diazepam (0.5 mg/kg
to a maximum of 20 mg) are also options. In the hospital setting, the
drugs of choice for convulsive status are also midazolam (0.1 mg/kg to
a maximum of 5 mg), lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg to a maximum of 4 mg), or
diazepam (0.3 mg/kg to a maximum of 10 mg), administered intravenously. Prehospital medication administration should be considered
when choosing the next line and dose of treatment.
If the patient does not respond to the first-line treatment or has
received the medication twice, second-line drugs such as phenytoin
(20 mg/kg to a maximum of 1000 mg), phenobarbital (20 mg/kg to a
maximum of 1000 mg), and levetiracetam (60 mg/kg to a maximum
of 3000 mg) can be used. If the patient remains in a convulsive state
after the first administration of the second-line drugs, another second-line drug can be given. If symptoms persist, third-line drugs such
as propofol (2.5 mg/kg initially, continuous infusion 3 mg/kg/h), thiopental (2–5 mg/kg initially, continuous infusion 1–4 mg/kg/h), or midazolam (continuous infusion 1 3g/kg/h) may be used in the intensive care
setting. In such cases, securing the airway with endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation is important, along with other intensive
care measures.
4. 2. 3. INITIAL PATIENT CARE: ABCDE ? SAMPLE
Proper initial care is essential when managing a patient with seizures,
The following steps can help ensure the patient’s safety:
A (AIRWAY):
—
Maintain an open airway by tilting the head and using supraglottic aids such as the oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway.
—
Endotracheal intubation may be necessary if hypnotics are used.
B (BREATHING):
—
Administer 100% oxygen via face mask with reservoir.
—
Continuously measure SpO' values.
—
Regularly assess the respiratory rate and the need for mechanical ventilation.
C (CIRCULATION):
—
Continuously monitor vital signs.
—
Check pulse and blood pressure, particularly for hypotension
when using hypnotics.
—
Place two wide venous lines as soon as possible.
—
Perform standard laboratory tests for electrolyte disorders.

137
4. 2. Seizures

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

The patient’s age at the time of the first seizure can provide
clues to the underlying cause. For example, febrile states and hereditary neurological or metabolic disorders are common causes of
seizures in patients younger than 2. Idiopathic convulsive disorders
are the most common cause of seizures in patients between the
ages of 2 and 14. In adulthood, seizures most often occur due to
brain tumours, TBI, or stroke.
To properly classify seizure disorders, it is important to recognise whether the seizure is focal or generalised, as well as whether
a motor component is present. Generalised convulsive disorders
involve electrical impulses that affect both hemispheres of the
brain, often leading to impaired consciousness. Within this category, seizures can present with a motor response such as tonic-clonic,
exclusively tonic, or exclusively clonic. In contrast, seizure disorders
with a focal response are characterised by impulses originating
from one hemisphere, usually from subcortical structures. These
types of seizures often present with simpler manifestations, such
as automatisms, muscle atony, or clonic muscle spasms, with or
without loss of consciousness. Focal seizures can also appear
without the motor component and may involve dysfunction of the
autonomic nervous system (gastrointestinal sensations, feelings
of heat or cold) or cognitive and/or emotional impairment. It is important to note that a focal seizure can progress to a generalised
seizure at any moment!
Status epilepticus is a life-threatening condition caused by a
continuous burst of impulses in the central nervous system. It can
manifest in two forms: convulsive and non-convulsive. Convulsive
status epilepticus is characterised by tonic-clonic activity lasting
longer than 5 minutes or two consecutive seizures without regaining consciousness. Non-convulsive status epilepticus is typically
characterised by changes in mental status and can be more challenging to diagnose.

138

E (exposure):
—
Remove the patient’s clothing but avoid tying the patient to
prevent injuries from seizures.
—
Remove clothing or jewellery around the neck to prevent
suffocation.
—
Check for injuries such as tongue biting and sphincter
relaxation.
In addition to the ABCDE approach, obtaining a SAMPLE or AMPLE
history is important:
S
(Signs/symptoms): Examine the symptoms, including any
presence of an aura before the seizure (headache, dizziness,
sensory sensations).
A
(Allergies): Check for drug and food allergies, particularly those
related to the use of antiepileptic drugs.
M
(Medications): Determine if the patient is already taking antiepileptic drugs or other medications.
P
(Past illnesses): Check if this is the first manifestation of epilepsy or if the patient has a previous diagnosis of seizure disorder.
L
(Last oral intake): Determine when the patient last ate and
whether there is a risk of stomach content aspiration.
E
(Events leading up to present illness/injury): Identify any precipitating factors for the onset of seizures, such as loud sounds,
bright lights, insomnia, etc.

SOURCES
1.
Pinsky MR, Broachard L, Hedenstierna G, Antonelli M. Applied Physiology
in Intensive Care Medicine 1. 3rd ed. Springer; 2012.
2.
Gupta A, Gelb A, Duane D, Adapa R. Essentials of Neuroanesthesia and
Neurointensive Care. 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press; 2018.
3.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th
ed. Elsevier; 2023.

139
4. 2. Seizures

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

D (DISABILITY):
—
Check glucose levels as hypoglycaemia is a common
cause of seizures. Administer 40% glucose in the case of
hypoglycaemia.
—
Assess the patient’s state of consciousness using the AVPU/
GCS scale.

140

4. 3. ACUTE POISONING

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

4. 3. !. INTRODUCTION
Poisoning is a clinical condition characterised by a sudden or gradual
disease onset due to contact with the poison.
The symptoms that develop are closely related to the type of
poison. Its absorption into the bloodstream is essential for the systemic action of the poison. Acute poisoning requires prompt diagnosis
and urgent treatment. As these are sometimes substances we do not
encounter daily, it is important to have constant access to the data and
possible therapeutic interventions that should be done in the event of
poisoning (usually a contact number for a poison control centre). Any
substance taken in the wrong dose can be toxic.
Acute poisoning can be accidental, suicidal, criminal, environmental, or industrial. They are usually accidental. Suicidal poisoning is
caused by the deliberate intake of poison to cause death. Environmental poisonings are usually caused by food, but they can also be caused
by plants or animals, such as venomous snakes or spiders.
4. 3. 2. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT: ABCDE ? SAMPLE
A (AIRWAY):
—
Patency primarily depends on the effect of the poison on the
state of consciousness.
—
In the case of poison ingestion, damaged airways are a possibility (e.g., strong acids).
—
Gastric content in the mouth (in the case of vomiting).
—
Some poisons may cause seizures, and bite marks on the tongue
can be visible.
—
Airway manoeuvres depend on the patient’s state.

141

142

C (CIRCULATION):
—
Possible abnormalities (depending on the poison — fast or slow
heart rate, arrhythmias) are diverse.
—
Blood pressure can be affected (depending on the dose and poison).
—
Skin appearance and CRT may indicate shock.
—
Bleeding can also happen because of poisoning (e.g., unintentional
anticoagulant poisoning).
—
IV access and standard monitoring are obligatory.
—
Some poisons have specific antidotes that should be applied in a
life-threatening condition.
D (DISABILITY):
—
Level of consciousness can be affected due to the direct effect of
the poison on the central nervous system (CNS) or indirectly by affecting other vital functions.
—
In the case of a coma, advanced airway management and mechanical ventilation are indicated.
—
Pupils may help differentiate poisons (e.g., myosis in opiate poisoning, mydriasis in sympathomimetic drug poisoning) and whether
the poisoning caused severe CNS damage (for example, diffuse
brain oedema — unreactive dilated pupils).
—
Glucose levels can be high/normal/low (persons with type 1 diabetes may attempt suicide with insulin).
E (EXPOSURE):
—
Very important! Check the patient and their surroundings, which
can provide critical clues about the type and dose of poison and
potential injuries.
—
Suicide attempt — the means of the attempt are usually in the person’s immediate environment (i.e., empty pill blisters).
—
SAMPLE — be thorough; it varies depending on the type of poisoning.
Specific measures that can be taken include decontamination,
stimulation of excretion, and administration of specific antidotes. These
are taken immediately, as soon as we identify the poison and assess the
patient. Since we are surrounded by an infinite number of poisons, it is
impossible to know specific measures for all of them — hence the establishment of poison control centres available 24/7.

Decontamination is directly dependent on the type of contact
between the poison and the body. Usually, this means decontamination of the digestive system by performing gastric lavage. Rinsing
the eyes that came into contact with a chemical is also a method of
decontamination. There is no evidence of the usefulness of gastric
lavage and/or activated charcoal.
Stimulation of excretion can be done via the gastrointestinal
system or urinary tract. Administering activated charcoal is one way
of stimulating excretion. If a poison can be excreted in the urine or
filtered by dialysis, renal replacement therapy may be commenced in
a critically ill patient. Some poisons suitable for this are barbiturates,
lithium, metformin, salicylates, and methanol.
Antidotes are drugs with an effect opposite to the poison.
Airway management must be done prior to antidote administration.
Also, it is important to note that some antidotes have a shorter time of
duration than the poison. Therefore, it is crucial to monitor the patient
and repeat the doses if needed. One such antidote is naloxone.
TABLE !. Toxic agents and corresponding antidotes and dosages
POISON

ANTIDOTE

DOSE

Paracetamol

Acetylcysteine

200 mg/mL in 200 mL of
5% glucose adjusted for
body weight

Flumazenil

Initial dose 0.2 mg IV,
repeated dose 0.5 mg
every
minute (or until effect) up
to 3 mg max.

Opioids

Naloxone

0.4–2 mg IV
Repeated dose every 2–3
min up to 10 mg max.
CAN BE ADMINISTERED
INTRAMUSCULARLY.
Additional doses are
necessary every 20–60
minutes!

Calcium channel blockers

Calcium chloride 10%

IV bolus 20 mL every 2–5
min

Beta-blockers

Glucagon; insulin, glucose,
lipid emulsion, phosphodiesterase inhibitors

Glucagon: 50–150 7g/kg

Local anaesthetics

Intralipid 20%

1.5 mL/kg for 1 min, followed by 15 mL/kg/h

Carbon monoxide

Oxygen

FiO- = 1 (100%)

Benzodiazepines

SOURCES
1.
0usti+ A, SotoBek V. Handbook of Anesthesiology, Reanimatology, and Intensive Care
Medicine for students of medicine and dental medicine. 1st ed. Zagreb: Medicinska
naklada; 2021.

143
4. 3. Acute poisoning

Part 4: Sudden neurological deterioration

B (BREATHING):
—
Respiratory rate may be affected (e.g., opiate poisoning — low respiratory rate).
—
Abnormal auscultatory findings may help in the suspicion of
aspiration of gastric content in a patient with an altered level
of consciousness.
—
If the airway is not patent and breathing is inadequate, the saturation (SpO') will decrease — if so, start oxygen therapy and secure
the airway properly.

144

PART 4: SUDDEN NEUROLOGICAL DETERIORATION
Stick to the ABCDEs! Do the GCS when appropriate.

Keypoints

Not all causes of sudden neurological deterioration are strictly neurological
(e.g, hypoxia and hypotension).

Part 5: Sepsis

If there are signs of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP):
— Administer mannitol
— Elevate the head by 30°
— If trained, sedate the patient
— Consider short term hyperventilation
In case of seizures, secure the airway and stop the seizure (e.g. by
administering a benzodiazepine via the easiest available route) as soon as
possible; while promptly identifying and treating the underlying cause (e.g.
hypoglycaemia).
When poisoning is suspected, apply basic decontamination, administer
specific antidotes if available, consider contacting the toxicology centre for
additional tips and guidance, and don’t forget to provide supportive care to
vital functions until the condition resolves.

145—152

146

Ivan Vuksan, Marko MiloBevi+, Janja Tar1ukovi+
%. !. SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK

Part 5: Sepsis

%. !. !. INTRODUCTION
Sepsis is a severe and potentially life-threatening condition that
occurs when the body’s immune system responds inadequately to infection, leading to widespread inflammation and tissue damage. It is
important to understand basic pathophysiology to diagnose and treat
it effectively.
The mortality rate of sepsis is high, ranging from 20–50%, depending on the underlying pathology and the timing of initial treatment. The excessive release of inflammatory mediators during sepsis
leads to generalised vasodilation and increased permeability of the
blood vessels, causing relative hypovolaemia and hypoperfusion with
damage to tissues and organs throughout the body.
To diagnose sepsis and initiate prompt treatment, two criteria
should be met:
1.
the presence of an infection (suspected or documented: e.g.,
justified suspicion is sufficient, such as patient history suggesting urinary infection, physical examination involving audible
rales over part of the lungs, etc.)
2.
change in Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score
of at least 2 points (Table 2).
However, the SOFA score requires specific laboratory findings
for interpretation, which takes time. To overcome this limitation, a
quick SOFA (qSOFA) score was developed, which consists of three
clinical findings available through physical examination, making it

147

148

easy to use and repeat as often as necessary. Timely recognition and
treatment of sepsis are essential determinants of patient outcome.

Early recognition and prompt treatment of septic shock are critical for reducing mortality rates. Treatment includes early antibiotic
administration, fluid resuscitation, and vasoactive medications to
maintain adequate blood pressure and organ perfusion.

Possible sources:
1. Respiratory tract
2. Abdomen
3. Urinary tract
4. Indwelling catheters
5. Skin and soft tissues

INCREASE IN SOFA
score / 2
qSOFA (/ 2)
— increased respiratory rate (/ 22/min)

— hypotension, systolic BP < 100 mmHg
— altered mental status, GCS < 15

%.!.2. INITIAL MANAGEMENT: ABCDE ? SAMPLE
The initial management of sepsis involves the following:
A (AIRWAY):
—
Assess the patient’s airway to ensure it is open. In cases of obstruction due to the collapse of soft tissues, open the airway by
tilting the head, lifting the mandible, and placing an oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway if necessary.
—
It is essential to note that patients with sepsis, particularly
the elderly, may have reduced consciousness that can lead to
airway obstruction, often audible as snoring.
B (BREATHING):
—
Check the symmetry of chest expansion on inhalation and respiratory rate, and perform lung auscultation and percussions.
—
Place a pulse oximeter to monitor oxygen saturation.
—
Provide high-flow oxygen.

0 points

1 points

Respiratory
system/PaO-/
FiO-,
mmHg

/ 400

< 400

< 300

< 200

< 100

Coagulation/
platelets,
7mol/L

> 150

< 150

< 100

< 50

< 20

Dopamine
5.1–15 or
adrenaline .
0.1 or noradrenalin
e . 0.1

Dopamine >
15 or adrenaline > 0.1 or
noradrenaline > 0.1

2 points

3 points

4 points

Cardiovascular
system
catecholamine
doses/7g/kg/
min

MAP /
70
mmHg

MAP < 70
mmHg

Dopamine <
5 or dobutamine any
dose

CNS/GCS score

15

13–14

10–12

6–9

<6

Kidneys/creatinine (7mol/L),
urine output
(mL/h)

< 110

110–170

171–299

300–440
< 500

> 440
< 200

Liver/bilirubin
(7mol/L)

20

20–32

33–101

102–204

> 204

TABLE !. Criteria for diagnosing sepsis with the most common sources of infection and
qSOFA components
INFECTION
(suspected or documented)

Organ system/
parameter

—

Patients with sepsis may experience respiratory failure due
to several reasons. For instance, sepsis often originates from
pneumonia, leading to tachypnoea as the body compensates
for the reduced diffusion of gases in the lungs due to the inflammatory infiltrate. Another possibility is sepsis caused by an infection of a different origin, leading to metabolic acidosis, which
the body compensates for by increasing the respiratory rate (by
reducing p6CO', the body returns the pH to physiological levels).
Patients with sepsis often have a respiratory rate greater than
22/min. If a patient with sepsis has a respiratory rate < 20/min,
uses auxiliary respiratory muscles, and has a small inspiratory
volume, this indicates respiratory fatigue, which needs to be
treated with non-invasive or invasive mechanical ventilation.

C (CIRCULATION):
—
Check the patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, capillary
refill time, and central and peripheral pulses. Maintain ECG
monitoring.
—
Note that in patients with sepsis, the pulse rate may or may not
be increased. Additionally, elderly patients taking chronic medications, such as beta-blockers, may not be able to compensate
for changes in circulation by increasing their heart rate.
—
Hypotension is common in patients with sepsis due to generalised vasodilation and increased endothelial permeability
caused by inflammatory mediators. It is important to assess

5. 1. Sepsis and septic shock

Part 5: Sepsis

SEPTIC SHOCK
Septic shock is a severe and life-threatening condition that can occur
in patients with sepsis. It is characterised by abnormal circulatory
physiology and cellular metabolism, resulting in increased mortality.
To diagnose septic shock, the patient must meet the following criteria, in addition to the diagnosis of sepsis:
1.
hypotension with mean arterial pressure below 65 mmHg,
despite fluid resuscitation with a 30 mL/kg of balanced crystalloid solution (this is needed to rule out hypovolaemia as the
cause of low blood pressure),
2.
serum lactate levels higher than 2 mmol/L.

149

TABLE 2. SOFA score

Part 5: Sepsis

—
—
—
—
—

—
—

—

hypovolaemia and treat it with a bolus of balanced crystalloid
solution. If hypotension persists after the bolus, a vasopressor,
such as noradrenaline (0.01–0.5 3g/kg/min), should be initiated.
Prolonged capillary refill time may be indicative of tissue and
organ hypoperfusion; the more pronounced the hypoperfusion,
the longer the capillary refill time will be.
ECG monitoring is necessary as sepsis can cause new arrhythmias or worsen existing ones, and may lead to cardiac arrest due
to hypoxia and/or (relative) hypovolaemia.
If hypotension is marked, the pulse may only be palpated in the
central blood vessels, with a systolic blood pressure greater than
approximately 80 mmHg when palpated on the radial artery.
Establish at least one large-bore intravenous line (* 18 G) to
enable the rapid administration of balanced crystalloid intravenous fluids at a dose of 30 mL/kg of body weight.
Once an intravenous line is established, perform laboratory tests
such as complete blood count, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin,
sodium, potassium, creatinine, and liver function test, and obtain
blood and microbial samples from the presumed origin of infection (such as urine culture). Additionally, arterial blood gases
should be measured to calculate the SOFA score.
Place a urinary catheter to monitor hourly urine output, check for
pyuria, and send urine for analysis.
The administration of intravenous antibiotics as soon as possible
is an ABSOLUTE PRIORITY in patients with suspected sepsis.
Start with a broad-spectrum antibiotic, and adapt it to the microorganisms most likely causing the infection at the presumed site
of origin.
The first-hour bundle indicates procedures that should be initiated within one hour of the patient’s admission to the hospital.

infection, such as gangrenous foot or abdominal distension.
Keep the patient warm.

151

Patients with sepsis require hospitalisation, and those with respiratory insufficiency or septic shock require intensive care. Sepsis
is a life-threatening condition with a mortality rate of up to 50% and
is a significant cause of death worldwide. Timely recognition and appropriate management are essential to improve patient outcomes.
Therefore, it is crucial to recognise the signs and symptoms of sepsis
and initiate appropriate treatment promptly.

5. 1. Sepsis and septic shock

150

—

D (DISABILITY):
—
Perform a neurological assessment of the patient, including
AVPU or GCS scale and pupil examination. Check the patient’s
blood glucose to rule out hypo-/hyperglycaemia as the cause of
altered consciousness.
—
Patients with diabetes may experience difficulty regulating their
blood glucose levels, which could be the first sign of an infection.
E (EXPOSURE AND ENVIRONMENT):
—
If the source of sepsis has a surgical cause, such as perforated
appendicitis, it should be surgically managed as soon as possible to achieve source control.
—
Measure the patient’s body temperature: a patient with sepsis
may or may not be febrile. Often, elderly patients with multiple
comorbidities do not develop a fever in sepsis: normal body temperature does not exclude the patient’s septic condition.
—
Examine the patient thoroughly, checking for visible sources of

SOURCES
1.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed. Elsevier;
2023.
2.
Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, Antonelli M, Coopersmith CM, French C, et al.
Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and
Septic Shock 2021. Crit Care Med. 2021; 49(11): 1063–e143.

152

PART %: SEPSIS
Stick to the ABCDEs!

Keynotes

To diagnose sepsis a patient should have a documented or suspected infection
with a change in SOFA score of at least 2 points, which is a time consuming and
somewhat impractical scoring system in an acute setting. That is why we use
qSOFA as a first step.

Part 6: Blood, fluids and
electrolytes

qSOFA:
—
Respiratory rate ) 22/min,
—
Systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg,
—
Altered mental status with < GCS 15.
If sepsis is suspected:
—
Obtain cultures.
—
Administer broad spectrum antibiotics i.v.
—
Search for signs of shock (not only, but most importantly hypotension and
lactate levels).
—
Administer fluids (30 mL/kg).
—
Apply vasopressors if the patient remains hypotensive after 30 mL/kg of
fluid administration.
Do all of this within one hour of suspected sepsis!

153—180

154

&.!. INTRAVENOUS FLUIDS

Erika 0uper-Petrinjac

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

&. !. !. INTRODUCTION
Intravenous (IV) fluid is a drug administered when a person is, due to
the nature of a disease, unable to sustain their own basal metabolic needs. This happens in a couple of situations. Human metabolic
needs are met with water and food intake. If the level of consciousness is altered, that becomes impossible. Also, when there is a severe
gastrointestinal abnormality, even if the patient is theoretically able
to swallow food and drink water, absorption is impaired, and deficit
develops. There are some states in which IV fluids are administered
to compensate for the losses (blood transfusion product in the case
of bleeding). To understand indications, contraindications, and for
proper choice of an IV fluid, some basic physiological facts need to
be stated. Approximately 60% of the human body weight is water. It
varies with age, sex, and body composition.
Total body water is located intracellularly and extracellularly. Extracellular fluid can be divided into the following compartments:
—
interstitial fluid (lymph, protein-poor fluid between the cells),
—
intravascular fluid (plasma volume),
—
transcellular fluid (gastrointestinal fluid, bile, urine, vitreous
body, joint fluid, pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial fluid),
—
fluid in bones and dense connective tissue (anatomically
significant portion, but does not form functional extracellular fluid because of the slow flow between this and other
compartments).

155

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

&. !. 2. BASAL METABOLISM
Urine, gastrointestinal fluid production, perspiration, and invisible losses (from skin and lungs) are responsible for basal metabolic
needs. If a patient is unable to maintain their basal metabolic requirements through oral intake, fluid and electrolyte disorders will occur.
The 4-2-1 formula is used to calculate hourly basal metabolic needs.
In some conditions, the retrograde deficit should also be calculated
into the deficit (e.g., a patient with a prolonged fasting period) and
calculated extra losses should be added. Some losses are impossible
to determine precisely (vomiting, diarrhoea). As always, clinical presentation and ABCDE assessment findings guide us to optimise fluid
administration (for example, but not limited only to, heart rate, blood
pressure, CRT, and urine output).
Sequestered
(17.5%)
Extracellular (ECF)
(45%)
Functional ECF
(27.5%)

Bones and dense connective tissue (15%)
Transcellular (2.5%)

Intravascular (7.5%)

Plasma (5.5%)
Subglycocalyx (2%)

Interstitial (20%)

Intracellular (55%)

is around 4–6 hours. Indications, contraindications, and side effects
vary depending on the different properties of each fluid.

157

&. !. 3. !. CRYSTALLOIDS

6. 1. Intravenous fluids

156

UNBALANCED SOLUTIONS
Saline (0.9% NaCl) has a higher chloride ion (strong ion difference —
the sum of strong cation concentrations (Na, Mg, K) minus the sum
of strong anion concentrations [Cl, lactate]). SID of extracellular fluid
is approx. 40 mEq/L and SID of saline is 0, meaning that infusing a
0.9% NaCl solution reduces SID and causes metabolic acidosis. It
has a clinically significant effect at doses higher than 1,000 mL when
it causes hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.
BALANCED SOLUTIONS
They have chloride concentrations similar to human plasma concentrations. They have added anions such as acetate, malate, and
gluconate. They behave as buffers and create bicarbonates. Acetate
is metabolised throughout the body, is not dependent on liver metabolism, and metabolises faster than lactates. It does not interfere with
glucose or insulin levels. Lactate is metabolised in the liver and can
become glucose through gluconeogenesis. In severe shock, there
is a disturbance in liver metabolic function, and acetate metabolism
remains unaffected. Gluconate metabolism is not fully explained.
Besides additional buffers, these solutions contain added different
cation concentrations (Na, K, Ca, Mg).
TABLE 2. Classification of IV fluids

FIGURE !. Total body water distribution

IV fluid
TABLE !. Basal metabolic requirements (if a person weights 70 kg, first 10 kg = 40 mL/h, next
10 kg = 20 mL/h, and for the remaining 50 kg, add 50 mL/h – in sum 110 mL/h) (retrieved from
Morgan & Mikhail’s Clinical Anesthesiology, 6th edition, 2018)

Ideal body weight

Requirements

first 10 kg

4 mL/kg/h

next 10 kg

add 2 mL/kg/h

each kg above 20 kg

add 1 mL/kg/h

&. !. 3. TYPE AND SELECTION OF INTRAVENOUS FLUID
The Table 2 presents IV fluids sorted by type. The basic classification
distinguishes crystalloid and colloid IV fluids. The main difference
between them is in the plasma half-life. Crystalloids have a significantly shorter half-life (approx. 20–40 min), while the colloid half-life

Example

Characteristics

Crystalloids

Unbalanced solutions

Balanced solutions

0.9% NaCl (saline)

Isotonic, contains higher Cl=
concentration than plasma

Hypertonic saline (1.8%, 3%,
7.5%)

For correction of
hypoosmolar hyponatraemia
and elevated ICP

Ringer lactate

Hypotonic, contains buffer
(lactate)

Plasma-Lyte 148

Isotonic, contains buffers
(acetate and gluconate)

Colloids
Hydroxyethyl starch
(HES)

Plasma derivatives

HES 6%
Human albumin 20%
Freshly frozen plasma

Plasma volume expansion,
numerous adverse effects

158

TABLE 3. Characteristics of commonly used IV fluids compared to human plasma
Plasma

0.9% NaCl

Ringer lactate

Plasma-Lyte
148

Sodium
(mmol/L)

136–145

154

130

140

Potassium
(mmol/L)

3.5–5.0

4

5

Magnesium
(mmol/L)

0.8–1.0

Calcium
(mmol/L)

2.2–2.6

Chloride
(mmol/L)

98–106

1,5
3
154

109

98

Acetate
(mmol/L)

27

Gluconate
(mmol/L)

23

Lactate
(mmol/L)

28

eSID (mEq/L)

42

28

50

Osmolarity

291

308

273

295

Osmolality

287

286

256

271

pH

7.35–7.45

4.5–7.0

5.0–7.0

4–8

SOURCES
1.

2.
3.

Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Leslie K, Wiener-Kronish JP. Miller’s
Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
Reddy S, Weinberg L, Young P. Crystalloid fluid therapy. Crit Care. 2016; 20:59.
Butterword JF, Mackey DC, Wasnick JD. Morgan & Mikhails Clinical Anesthesiology,
6th ed. Philadelphia: McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.

159
6. 1. Intravenous fluids

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

&. !. 3. 2. COLLOIDS
Colloids have higher colloid-osmotic pressure and reduce transcapillary filtration rate in the event of low capillary hydrostatic pressure.
Therefore, they expand the plasma volume. Their half-life is longer
compared with crystalloids. However, they tend to have a nasty
side-effect profile, which limits their indications and allowed volumes
to be infused. In emergency settings, the most commonly used colloid
is HES 6% (hydroxyethyl starch), which is notorious for coagulopathy,
anaphylactoid reactions (< 0.6%), and renal toxicity, making it contraindicated in patients with renal failure. Nevertheless, it is indicated in
severe haemorrhagic shock when blood product availability is limited.

160

Lara Valen1i+ SerBi+, Berislav Barbali+
&. 2. MANAGEMENT OF ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

Electrolytes are electrically charged substances commonly found
in blood and other bodily fluids. They are essential for various physiological processes, such as the maintenance of proper membrane
potential and the generation and propagation of the action potential
in nerve and muscle cells. Sodium, potassium, and chloride are the
most significant among them, along with magnesium, calcium, and
phosphates. Electrolyte disorders are most commonly classified according to the change in their (usual) plasma concentration and can
have increased (hyper-) and decreased (hypo-) values. They can lead
to potentially life-threatening conditions, so it is important to recognise and treat them as soon as possible.
&. 2. !. HYPOKALAEMIA AND HYPERKALAEMIA
Potassium is an electrolyte vital for maintaining normal body functions. Changes in its concentration can cause the sudden onset of
potentially life-threatening conditions.
Potassium is primarily an intracellular positively charged ion
(cation). The sodium-potassium pump (Na-/K--ATPase, Na-/K- pump)
found in the membrane of all cells is responsible for maintaining
potassium homeostasis in the body. It maintains the normal resting
membrane potential through the activity of the enzyme Na/K-ATPase,
which transports three sodium ions out of the cell in exchange for two
potassium ions, thus removing one positive charge carrier from inside
the cell. The normal intracellular concentration of potassium when

161

162

HYPERKALAEMIA
Hyperkalaemia is defined as the elevation of potassium concentration above its upper limit, usually above 5.0 to 5.5 mmol/L. It can be
classified as mild, moderate, or severe, depending on the plasma potassium concentration.
Mild hyperkalaemia is defined as a potassium concentration of
5.5 to 5.9 mmol/L. It doesn’t usually cause any symptoms and is typically detected accidentally while performing routine laboratory tests.
This condition can also be chronic, usually in patients with a certain
degree of decreased kidney function, also often without a clinical
manifestation. The need for treatment depends on the presence of
symptoms and is usually done by stimulating the elimination of potassium through either oral or rectal suspensions, as well as modifying
the diuretic therapy, if present.
Moderate hyperkalaemia is defined as a potassium concentration of 6.0 to 6.4 mmol/L. Symptoms can be present, and more worrying, changes in heart rhythm can also occur.
In severe hyperkalaemia (potassium concentration of 6.5
mmol/L or higher), these changes are almost always present, making
this a potentially life-threatening condition requiring emergency
treatment.
These patients should be examined using the ABCDE approach
and their history should be taken according to the SAMPLE acronym.
It is of utmost importance to monitor these patients’ vital signs using
a standard 3-lead ECG monitor, regularly measure blood pressure,
and continuously monitor SpO-. Serial ECG readings should be recorded to monitor changes in the ECG pattern or to gauge the effectiveness of therapy.
Symptoms are non-specific and depend on the overall level of
potassium. They vary from diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, thirst, muscle

weakness, muscle pain or numbness, and heart palpitations with or
without chest pain.
The expected ECG changes include first-degree AV block, the
loss of P waves, broadened QRS complex, ST denivelation, the fusion
of S and T waves, formation of the so-called sine-wave pattern, and tall
T waves (tenting T waves). Patients can present with bradycardia and
ventricular tachycardia, and if left untreated, it can progress to cardiac
arrest.
Treatment of moderate or severe hyperkalaemia depends on the
clinical presentation (see Figure 1). The three basic steps of treatment
are to protect the heart muscle, stimulate the potassium flux into the
cells, and remove excess potassium from the body.
If ECG changes are present, start the treatment with the application of intravenous calcium in the form of calcium gluconate or calcium
chloride in a slow IV infusion. This protects the myocardium from the
deleterious effects of high potassium concentrations. However, this
does not lower the actual potassium concertation.
Therefore, treatment is continued by trying to move the excess
potassium inside the cells by administering intravenous glucose
solution with short-acting insulin and nebulised salbutamol. In cases
of severe hyperkalaemia or in cases of moderate therapy-resistant
hyperkalaemia with pronounced ECG changes and/or cardiac arrhythmias, it is important to seek immediate expert help from a nephrology
specialist and consider emergency dialysis. Furthermore, it is important to recognise the cause of hyperkalaemia.
HYPERKALAEMIA CAN BE CAUSED BY:
—
acidaemia, i.e., lowering of serum pH – this leads to the removal
of potassium from the cells in exchange for the influx of hydrogen
ions
—
diabetes — the insulin-regulated transport of glucose inside the
cells is impaired (co-transport with potassium)
—
diuretics — potassium-sparing diuretics: aldosterone-receptor
antagonists: spironolactone — Aldactone, eplerenone – Inspra®,
Diuron®), thiazide diuretics (indapamide, hydrochlorthiazide)
—
chronic kidney failure or acute kidney injury
—
various other medications — ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers,
non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
—
tissue breakdown — rhabdomyolysis, tumour necrosis,
haemolysis
—
potassium-rich diet
—
pseudohyperkalaemia — caused by haemolysis due to inadequate blood sampling or storage of blood samples.
—
The management of hyperkalaemia is illustrated in Figure 1.

163
6. 2. Managment of electrolyte disorders

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

fully balanced is 130–150 mmol/L, and its plasma concentration varies
between 3.5 and 5.0 mmol/L (values can vary depending on laboratory parameters).
Kidneys are responsible for the removal of roughly 90% of potassium, the remainder being secreted through the digestive tract
and other bodily fluids like sweat and saliva. In kidneys, the reabsorption of potassium happens in the proximal convoluted tubule and the
ascending limb of the loop of Henle, while its secretion happens in
the distal convoluted tubule.
Changes in serum pH, insulin, various medications (e.g., diuretics), as well as various hormones, can cause changes in extracellular
potassium concentration, either hyperkalaemia or hypokalaemia.
What makes potassium especially dangerous is its effect on myocardial cells, where it can cause the development of cardiac arrhythmias
that can progress to malignant arrhythmias and cause cardiac arrest.
Therefore, it is vital to recognise potassium disorders and their clinical presentation, even before laboratory tests are completed.

164

165

EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF HYPERKALAEMIA

Mild
K-5.5–5.9 mmol/L
Consider cause and
need for treatment

Moderate
K-6.0–6.4 mmol/L
Treatment guided by
clinical condition, ECG
and rate of rise

Severe
KC6.5 mmol/L
Emergency treatment
indicated

Protect the
heart

6. 2. Managment of electrolyte disorders

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

— Asses using ABCDE approach
— 12–lead ECG and monitor cardiac rhythm if serum potassium (K+) > 6.5 mmol/L
— Exclude pseudohyperkalaemia
— Give empirical treatment for arrythmia if hyperkalaemia suspected

!

Seek expert help

ECG Changes?
— Peaked T waves
— Flat/absent P waves
— Broad QRS
—Sine wave
— Bradycardia
— VT

YES

NO

IV Calcium
10 ml 10% Calcium Chloride IV or 30 ml 10%
Calcium Gluconate IV
— Use large IV access and give over 5 min
— Repeat ECG
— Consider further dose after 5 min if ECG
changes persist

Insulin–Glucose IV Infusion
—Glucose 25 g with 10 units soluble insulin over 15–30 min IV (25G-50 mL 50% glucose; 125
mL 20% glucose, 250 mL 10% glucose)
— If pre–treatment blood glucose < 7.0 mmol/L: Start 10% glucose infusion at 50 mL/hour
for 5 hours (25 g)

Shift K+
into cells

Consider

Risk of hyperglycaemia

Salbubtamol 10–20 mg nebulised
Consider

Remove K+
from body

Life-threatening hyperkalaemia

*Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate 10 g
X3/day oral for 72 HRS or

*Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate 10 g X3/
day oral for 72 HRS or

*Patiromer 8.4 g/day oral or

*Patiromer 8.4 g/day oral

*Calcium resonium 15 g X3/day oral
*Follow local practice
Monitor K+ and
blood glucose

Monitor serum K+ and blood glucose

Consider Dialysis
Seek expert help

K+/- 6.5mmol/L despite medical therapy

Prevention

Consider cause of hyperkalaemia and prevent reccurence

FIGURE !. Hyperkalaemia treatment algorithm (retrieved from www.crpguideline
crpguidelines.eu, under permission from the European Resuscitation Council, 2021)

!

Hypokalaemia can usually be discerned from an adequately
taken patient history even before laboratory results are in. It can
manifest in the musculoskeletal system and, more dangerously, in
the cardiovascular system. Symptoms can vary due to the patient’s
response to the lowering of potassium levels. Mild forms of hypokalaemia are characterised by the development of muscle cramps.
Symptoms progress further with the development of paralytic ileus
or nausea and vomiting, possible rhabdomyolysis, and cardiac arrhythmias. Patients can also present with various ECG changes like
the lowering of T waves, ST depression, and prominent U waves (especially in precordial V4–C6 leads). The most common cardiac manifestation in practice is the sudden onset of atrial fibrillation.
Treatment depends on the severity of the presentation. It is
most often treated by administering oral potassium supplements
like potassium citrate in a dilute aqueous solution (Kalinor®), which
is usually effective within 1–2 hours. In cases of inability to administer potassium via the oral route or in severe cases, potassium can
be supplemented via a peripheral vein. Application of intravenous
potassium is limited to 20 mmol/h, with 10 mmol/h being the recommended dose. In very severe cases, potassium can be supplemented with 10 mmol/10 minutes and an additional 10 mmol/5–10
minutes, with mandatory ECG monitoring.

167

HYPONATRAEMIA AND HYPERNATRAEMIA
Sodium is the main extracellular positively charged ion, i.e., cation. Its
plasma concentration varies from 135 to 145 mmol/L and usually stays
within this range despite daily variations in salt and fluid intake.
Along with chloride and bicarbonate anions, it maintains roughly
90% of extracellular osmolarity.
Sodium concentration is primarily dependent on the overall
volume of extracellular fluid, i.e., fluid depletion or overload that results
in hyper- or hyponatraemia. Mild disorders are usually asymptomatic
and self-limiting, while more severe disorders can lead to death.
TABLE !. Sodium disorders: causes, clinical presentation, and treatment options

Disorder

Causes, according to the
overall extracellular fluid
volume
LOW: diuretics, vomiting,
diarrhoea, thirst disorders

Hypernatraemia

THE MOST COMMON CAUSES OF HYPOKALAEMIA ARE:
—
Reduced potassium dietary intake — viewed in isolation, it
rarely causes hypokalaemia due to the kidney’s ability to compensate by reducing the secretion of potassium. However, it
can still cause symptomatic hypokalaemia in severe malnutrition combined with certain medications.
—
Increased intracellular influx of potassium — can be caused by
the elevation of serum pH (alkalaemia), hyperinsulinaemia, aldosterone, or salbutamol.
—
Increased potassium loss via kidneys or the digestive tract
— losses through kidneys are usually the result of primary hyperaldosteronism, Cushing syndrome, treatment with the loop
or osmotic diuretics, as well as in hypomagnesaemia. Hypokalaemia can also be the result of laxative use or in the case of
severe diarrhoea.

&. 2. 2. OTHER ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS

NORMAL: diabetes
insipidus
HIGH: loss of central regulatory mechanisms (e.g.,
after traumatic brain injury), overuse of hypertonic
IV solutions (rarely)

LOW: increased fluid loss
via the digestive tract
(pancreatitis, peritonitis), via the urinary tract
with diuretic overuse, in
various nephropathies, or
through burns
NORMAL: increased
release of antidiuretic
hormone (ADH) (SIADH
— syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion)
HIGH: liver cirrhosis,
cardiac decompensation, kidney failure (acute
or chronic), nephrotic
syndrome

Clinical presentation

Treatment

The leading symptom
is thirst. More severe
forms can lead to
impaired functioning
of the central nervous
system – disorientation, irritability, muscle cramps, altered
mental status, and
changes in the level
of consciousness
leading up to and
including coma.

Treatment usually
consists of fluid resuscitation, except in
conditions with high
volumes of extracellular fluids where
treatment starts with
increasing urine output and then careful
fluid resuscitation.

Leading symptoms
are caused by the
dysfunction of the
central nervous
system — disorientation, inertia, with more
severe cases presenting with stupor,
convulsions, coma
and death.

Careful sodium
replenishment with
hypertonic sodium chloride (NaCl)
solutions and with
restrictions in fluid
intake depending on
the overall extracellular fluid volume with
the optional addition
of a diuretic agent.

Caution is needed
when replenishing
sodium because of
possible central pontine demyelination.

HYPOCALCAEMIA AND HYPERCALCAEMIA
Calcium is an electrolyte largely found in bones (roughly 99% of total
body calcium), with the remaining 1% found in plasma where it circulates in three forms — protein-bound (albumin fraction), chelated,

6. 2. Managment of electrolyte disorders

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

HYPOKALAEMIA
Hypokalaemia is one of the most frequent electrolyte disorders recorded in everyday practice. It is more common than hyperkalaemia
and usually presents with milder symptoms. It is defined as a potassium concentration below 3.5 mmol/L and can be classified as mild
(3.0 to 3.4 mmol/L), moderate (2.5 to 2.9 mmol/L), or severe (< 2.4
mmol/L). It is very frequent in inpatients, with cardiac, nephrological,
and paediatric patients being the most susceptible.

Hyponatraemia

166

TABLE 2. Calcium disorders: causes, clinical presentation, and treatment options

Hypocalcaemia

Hypercalcaemia

Disorder

Causes

Clinical presentation

Treatment

hyperparathyroidism, malignant
diseases, granulomatous diseases
(sarcoidosis, TBC)

nausea, vomiting,
constipation, ileus,
hypotension, QT interval
shortening, arrhythmias,
polyuria, altered mental
status – most common
with ionised calcium levels above 3.5 mmol/L

IV fluid replenishment,
diuretics, calcitonin, and
bisphosphonate to block
the osteoclast activation,
corticosteroids to reduce
intestinal calcium absorption

hypoparathyroidism, vitamin D
deficiency, kidney
disease, magnesium depletion,
sepsis, blood
transfusion

tetany, hyperreflexia,
paraesthesia, epileptic
seizures, heart rhythm
disorders

Calcium replenishment
using either 10% calcium
chloride or 10% calcium
gluconate, magnesium or
vitamin D replenishment
as needed

HYPOMAGNESAEMIA AND HYPERMAGNESAEMIA
Magnesium is a cation important in maintaining various physiological
processes. It takes part in the functioning of the Na+/K+ pump and
regulates the flow of calcium into muscle cells, a vital process for the
maintenance of normal cardiac contractility and vascular tone.
TABLE 3. Magnesium disorders: causes, clinical presentation, and treatment options

Hypermagnesaemia

Disorder

Causes

Clinical presentation

Treatment

kidney failure

typically, cardiac
manifestations present
because of the antagonising effect on calcium:
first-degree AV block,
third-degree AV block,
and cardiac arrest (with
levels above 13 mmol/L).

emergency dialysis,
calcium supplementation
(temporary cardiac stabilisation), diuretics

medications (furosemide, aminoglycosides, digitalis),
alcoholism and
malnutrition,
increased loss via
the digestive tract,
diabetes with
glycosuria

dysfunction of the
central nervous system
with attention deficits,
tetany, fasciculations,
generalised tonic-clonic
seizures, cardiac manifestations (arrhythmias,
ischaemia, digitalis
poisoning)

oral or parenteral magnesium supplementation

As with calcium, its active form is found ionised in plasma. Laboratories usually measure total magnesium with concentrations varying
between 0.7 and 1.0 mmol/L. Disorders are classified as hypermagnesaemia (concentrations above 1.0 mmol/L) and hypomagnesaemia
(concentrations below 0.7 mmol/L).
&. 2. 3. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT
A (AIRWAY):
—
Loss of consciousness due to CNS-related symptoms or the
progression of cardiac presentations can result in sound phenomena like snoring due to upper airway soft tissue obstruction.
—
In the case of seizures, fluid contents can be found in the oral
cavity (foam, vomit, etc.) with resulting sound phenomena
like gargling.
B (BREATHING):
—
Respiratory rate can be increased due to irritability or psychomotor agitation in milder electrolyte disorders or as compensation for metabolic acidosis. In more severe cases, the respiratory rate can be reduced resulting in bradypnea or apnoea as
symptoms progress or cardiac arrest occurs.
—
It is important to consider possible injuries that can lead to
pathological chest wall motions (e.g., pneumothorax).
—
Auscultatory phenomena, e.g., rhonchi or rales due to secretions in the respiratory tract or aspiration of gastric contents.
—
With SpO- < 94% (< 88% with COPD) — apply oxygen therapy.
C (CIRCULATION):
—
Due to possible life-threatening cardiac manifestations, it is
important to monitor the patient: 3-lead ECG cardiac rhythm
monitoring, SpO-, blood pressure monitoring, and regular standard 12-lead ECG recording. Also, wide-diameter peripheral
venous access is important.
—
Pulse can be altered in line with various arrhythmias connected
with electrolyte disorders (bradycardic, tachycardic, regular, or
irregular pulse, loss of pulse in cardiac arrest!).
—
Hypotension can be linked to various arrhythmias.
—
In the case of arrhythmias, hypotension, or altered level of consciousness, a state of shock can occur with pale, cold, dry skin
and prolonged capillary refill time.
—
Urinary catheter should be placed to monitor urine output (consider the prior history of diuretic therapy when suspecting hypokalaemia) or response to diuretic therapy.
D (DISABILITY):
—
Assess the level of consciousness according to the AVPU scale

169
6. 2. Managment of electrolyte disorders

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

and in an ionised, active form. Total calcium and ionised calcium are
usually measured in laboratories and their concentrations vary from
2.2 to 2.6 mmol/L (total calcium) and 1.15 to 1.25 mmol/L (ionised fraction of calcium). Calcium is essential in coagulation processes, neuromuscular conduction, and muscle contractions. Increased calcium
concentration is called hypercalcaemia, whereas reduced concentration is called hypocalcaemia.

Hypomagnesaemia

168

170

—

—

E (EXPOSURE AND ENVIRONMENT):
—
Possible signs of liver cirrhosis, cardiac decompensation, pancreatitis, malnutrition, AV fistulas (kidney replacement therapy).
&. 2. 4. PATIENT HISTORY ACCORDING TO THE
SAMPLE APPROACH
S
(Symptoms): diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, thirst, muscle cramping or spasms, palpitations with or without chest pain, in
crease in urine output with or without diuretics, insufficient urine
output, CNS-related symptoms — excitability or depression of
CNS.
A
(Allergies): ask for known allergies to food or medications.
M
(Medications): DIURETICS (potassium-sparing diuretics/aldosterone receptors antagonists) or mannitol with inpatients, ACE
inhibitors, beta-blockers, non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), beta-2 agonists, insulin, arrhythmic drugs
(e.g., digitalis).
P
(Past or Pertinent medical history): chronic heart failure, chronic
kidney disease, dialysis treatment, diabetes, endocrine disorders (Cushing syndrome, SIADH, primary hyperaldosteronism,
diabetes insipidus, hyper- or hypoparathyroidism, hypovitaminosis D), alcoholism, malnutrition.
L
(Last oral intake): potential food intoxication with resultant vomiting or diarrhoea.
E
(Events leading up to present illness/injury): previous dialysis
history, food intake history, drug intake (deviations from regular

therapy schedule).

SOURCES
1.
Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Leslie K, Wiener-Kronish JP. Miller’s
Anesthesia. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020.
2.
Pinsky MR, Broachard L, Hedenstierna G, Antonelli M. Applied Physiology in Intensive
Care Medicine 1. 3rd ed. Springer; 2012.
3.
Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, Couper K, Deakin CD, Djärv T, et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced life support. Resuscitation.
2021; 161: 115–51.
4.
Lott C, Truhlar A, Alfonzo A, Barelli A, Gondazes-Salvado V, Hinkelbein J, et al.
European Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Cardiac arrest in special circumstances. Resuscitation. 2021; 161: 152-219.

171
6. 2. Managment of electrolyte disorders

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

—

or GCS.
Repeat assessment as disorders of consciousness can continue to progress.
Measure blood sugar level to exclude possible hyperglycaemia
or hypoglycaemia.
Pupils — monitor possible changes with loss or change in the
level of consciousness.

172

Danijel Kne*evi+, Janja Tar1ukovi+
&. 3. HAEMORRHAGE AND HAEMORRHAGIC SHOCK

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

Haemorrhage results from blood loss from the intravascular space,
which leads to a decrease in oxygen delivery to the cells. When oxygen
levels decrease to levels insufficient to maintain aerobic metabolism,
a state of shock occurs, irrespective of the initial cause. If the state of
generalised ischaemia persists, cell death with organ damage and the
development of multiorgan failure occurs. Ultimately, this leads to the
death of the organism.
Oxygen delivery to cells (DO') depends on two factors:
1.
cardiac output (CO), which is the product of stroke volume and
heart rate,
2.
oxygen content in the arterial blood, which is dependent on the
haemoglobin concentration (Hb) in the blood, saturation of the arterial blood with oxygen (SaO'), and oxygen partial pressure in the
arterial blood (PaO').
The aforementioned can be summarised in the following formula:
oxygen content in arterial blood = (1.38 7 Hb x SaO') + (0.0031 7 PaO')
We do not expect you to memorise the formula: the important thing to
note is that the delivery of the primary substrate (oxygen) for the work

173

174

NORMAL BLOOD VOLUME:
—
ADULTS: 70 mL/kg ideal body weight
—
CHILDREN: 80 mL/kg ideal body weight
Bleeding

Decrease in cardiac
output due to lower
circulating blood
volume

Haemoglobin
concentration
decreases

Decrease in oxygen delivery to cells and
compensatory activation of sympathetic
nervous system

Coagulation factors are
used for haemostasis
and consumption
coagulopathy occurs

Bleeding additionally
worsens

FIGURE !. Overview of the pathophysiological course and the vicious circle that occurs in
bleeding

&. 3. !. CLASSIFICATION OF BLEEDING
1.
STAGE: < 15% blood volume loss: usually without significant
changes in vital signs, IV fluid resuscitation is generally not required.
2.
STAGE: 15–30% blood volume loss: the patient becomes tachycardic, and the difference between systolic and diastolic pressures
decreases. Compensatory mechanisms are activated, peripheral
vasoconstriction occurs, and the skin and mucosa are pale and
cold to the touch. The patient may become agitated. Resuscitation
of circulating volume with crystalloids and colloids is required. In
patients with cardiovascular diseases, consider blood products.
3.
STAGE: 30–40% blood volume loss: blood pressure drops (systolic pressure < 90 mmHg), heart rate increases (> 110/min), visible
signs of peripheral hypoperfusion/shock — capillary refill time is
prolonged, urine output decreases, and consciousness is impaired
as cerebral blood flow becomes insufficient. Transfusion of blood
products is required.
*Haematocrit and haemoglobin findings are not objective and possibly false due to haemoconcentration. The decision on the transfusion of blood products is based on clinical assessment.
4.
STAGE: > 40% blood volume loss; compensatory mechanisms are
reached.

BLOOD VOLUME LOSS IS DIFFICULT TO ASSESS IN THE
FOLLOWING PATIENTS:
1.
ELDERLY PATIENTS have a reduced ability to compensate in the
case of acute bleeding due to their reduced cardiorespiratory
reserve. Their blood pressure will decrease more rapidly even in
the case of minor bleeding compared with the general population.
Similar can be seen in patients who have a so-called low fixed
cardiac output, e.g., patients with aortic stenosis that prevents an
increase in cardiac output. Their heart is already using compensatory mechanisms for their steady state and further compensation
is not possible.
2.
PATIENTS TAKING CHRONIC THERAPY AND PATIENTS WITH A
PACEMAKER. In patients taking beta-blockers, bleeding will not
lead to an increase in heart rate and will also cause a sooner drop
in blood pressure. Assessing bleeding based on heart rate in these
patients will lead to a significant underestimation of blood loss
(no compensatory tachycardia), and the same applies to patients
whose heart rate is defined by their pacemakers.
3.
PREGNANT WOMEN under normal circumstances have a higher
heart rate, increased circulating blood volume, and increased respiratory rate, which may complicate the assessment of blood loss.
4.
ATHLETES under normal circumstances and at rest may have a
heart rate of < 50/min. In cases of bleeding, significant relative
tachycardia in this group of patients may already be present well
under 100/min.
&. 3. 2. CAUSES OF SEVERE BLEEDING
—
traumatic injury (e.g., car accident, fall from a great height, stab or
gunshot wound, etc.)
—
bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., bleeding gastric or
duodenal ulcer, intestinal obstruction with necrosis, bleeding from
haemorrhoids, etc.)
—
massive bleeding in gynaecology and obstetrics (e.g., placental
abruption, placenta previa, extrauterine pregnancy, etc.)
—
bleeding from large blood vessels (e.g., aortic dissection, ruptured
thoracic/abdominal aortic aneurysm)
—
tumour infiltrating large blood vessels (e.g., thoracic aorta infiltration by a lung or oesophageal cancer).
&. 3. 3. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT: ABCDE ? SAMPLE
GOAL:
—
Recognise and stop the bleeding as soon as possible (damage
control resuscitation)!
—
Check breathing and pulse.
—
If severe bleeding is present, try to limit/stop bleeding by applying
pressure/bandages.

175
6. 3. Haemorrhage and haemorrhagic shock

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

of each cell in the body, along with CO, mostly depends on the concentration of haemoglobin — which is lost due to bleeding!
In summary, the absolute priority in this type of shock is to stop the
bleeding as quickly as possible and to compensate for blood loss. The
former prevents further loss of haemoglobin — the main carrier of oxygen,
and the latter allows the heart to achieve sufficient cardiac output.

176

—

FIGURE 2. Clinical presentation of haemorrhagic shock

A (AIRWAY) / B (BREATHING):
—
Check if the patient is able to keep the airway open. In the
case of obstruction, open the airway while stabilising the cervical spine if you suspect an injury.
—
Check for symmetrical chest movement, respiratory rate,
auscultation, and lung percussion. Use a pulse oximeter.
—
Set high-flow oxygen (15 L/min): SpO' ) 94%.
—
If the patient has acute respiratory insufficiency and/or impaired state of consciousness (GCS * 8), secure the airway
with an endotracheal tube.
C (CIRCULATION):
—
Connect the patient to ECG monitoring, measure the heart
rate simultaneously on the central and peripheral arteries,
blood pressure (repeat the measurement every 3–5 minutes),
and capillary refill time. Place a urinary catheter, and monitor
hourly urine output.
—
Obtain at least two wide-bore intravenous lines (. 18 G) 8 alternative vascular access if the above is not possible (intraosseous access, central venous access).
—
Try to assess the source of bleeding and blood loss:
— Do not forget about possible “hidden” bleeding in the
thorax, abdomen, pelvis, retroperitoneal space, and thigh
muscles.
— If bleeding is > 15% of total blood volume, administer crystalloids (saline, Ringer’s lactate, Plasma-Lyte, etc.) and colloids (6% HES, human albumin).
— Start targeted fluid resuscitation only in the case of hypotension until blood products are ready. Target pressures of
controlled/targeted hypotension are presented in more detail
below (damage control resuscitation).
— Whatever intravenous fluid you choose, make sure it is
warmed to body temperature (hypothermia further worsens
coagulopathy).

—

—

—

—

Aggressive resuscitation with large volumes of intravenous
fluids will lead to an increase in blood pressure, which carries
the risk of displacement/damage of an already-formed thrombus at the bleeding site and can cause dilutional coagulopathy.
This leads to further bleeding, which creates the need for even
greater volume resuscitation – thus creating a vicious cycle.
The priority is to provide the patient with emergency surgical/
radiological/endovascular/other haemostasis. During transport
to the hospital, prior to haemostasis, systolic blood pressure
should be maintained at a minimum level sufficient for the
short-term maintenance of organ viability, however low enough
not to stimulate bleeding further.
According to the latest recommendations, the target pressure
values for traumatic bleeding in patients with stab wounds
without suspected brain or spinal cord injury and no other risk
factors are MAP > 65 mmHg or systolic pressure 80–90 mmHg.
In patients with blunt injury and/or brain injury, spinal cord injury,
or other risk factors, the pressure values are MAP > 85–90
mmHg or systolic pressure 110–120 mmHg. Adjust the volume
of intravenous fluids administered according to the target pressure values, i.e., do not administer intravenous fluids until blood
pressure drops below target. Typically, intravenous fluid boluses
of 500–1000 mL are administered until the target pressure is
reached.
As soon as we are able to give the patient blood products and
significant bleeding is present, thromboelastography should be
monitored and targeted therapy should be applied according
to the guidelines. In case the above is not possible, the massive
transfusion protocol is 1:1:1 in the form of erythrocyte concentrate, fresh frozen plasma, and platelets with additional clotting
factors as needed.
Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic agent indicated in massive
bleeding that preserves the fibrin plaque at the bleeding site.
It is indicated to administer it within three hours of the onset of
bleeding, with the most commonly used scheme of 1 g in 100
mL of saline for 10 minutes and continuous administration of 1 g
in 500 mL of saline during the next 8 hours. No significant side
effects have been reported, but caution should be exercised
in patients with existing thromboembolic events, epilepsy, and
visual disturbances.
Consider commercially available clotting factors:
— recombinant factor VII, prothrombin complex (coagulation
factors II, VII, IX, X), antithrombin III, and factor XIII
— cryoprecipitate
Vasoconstrictors:
— administer in the case of traumatic brain injury and spinal
cord injury to maintain MAP in addition to fluids.

177
6. 3. Haemorrhage and haemorrhagic shock

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF HAEMORRHAGIC SHOCK:
— increase in heart rate (due to catecholamine effect
on the heart)
— tachypnoea
— flat jugular veins
— circulation centralisation — vasoconstriction in the “less important tissues”:
— cold, mottled skin
— decreased urine output
— consciousness impairment

VITAL SIGNS TO BE REPEATED EVERY FEW MINUTES IN
PATIENTS WITH HAEMORRHAGIC SHOCK:

Part 6: Blood, fluids and electrolytes

— respiratory rate and SpO'
— heart rate, arterial pressure, pulse strenght
(central and peripheral)
— ECG (rhythm, rate, and shape of QRS)
— capillary refill time.
D (DISABILITY):
—
Examine the patient’s state of consciousness (GCS), pupils,
and blood glucose.
—
Compensatory mechanisms in bleeding are aimed at maintaining sufficient cerebral blood flow. When bleeding causes
consciousness impairment, it usually means > 30% of circulating blood volume is lost and compensatory mechanisms
become insufficient.
E (EXPOSURE):
—
Measure the patient’s body temperature and warm them.
—
Examine the body in detail for the source of bleeding:
—
In traumatic bleeding, look for direct and indirect signs of long
bone or pelvic fractures, rib fractures, or abdominal distension.
—
In women of childbearing age with abdominal pain, do not
forget about the possibility of extrauterine pregnancy. Significant bleeding in pregnant women in the later stages of pregnancy is one of the most common causes of maternal mortality.
—
In the case of suspected bleeding from the digestive system,
do not forget to do a digital rectal examination (a trace of black
stool indicates bleeding from the oesophagus or stomach, and
a trace of fresh blood may be the result of bleeding from any
part of the digestive system).
SAMPLE HISTORY:
S
(Signs / symptoms): adjust the questions to the potential cause
and source of bleeding.
A
(Allergies): check if the patient has allergies.
M
(Medications): examine the patient for chronic medications;
check especially for antiplatelets (acetylsalicylic acid, clopidogrel, prasugrel), anticoagulant drugs (warfarin, NOACs, and
beta-blockers).
P
(Past illnesses): check if the patient has significant comorbidities and whether they have had surgery in the past.
L
(Last oral intake / last menstrual cycle): check when the patient
last ate (possibility of aspiration of gastric contents); in women
of childbearing age, check the date of the last menstruation.
E
(Events leading up to present illness): check for significant
events that preceded the current condition.

SOURCES
1.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed. Elsevier;
2023.
2.
Rossaint R, Afshari A, Bouillon B, Cerny V, Cimpoesu D, Curry N, et al. The European
guideline on management of major bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma: sixth
edition. Crit Care. 2023; 27(1): 80.
3.
Holcomb JB, Jenkins D, Rhee P, Johannigman J, Mahoney P, Mehta S, et al. Damage
control resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy of trauma. J Trauma.
2007; 62(2): 307–10.
4.
Woolley T, Thompson P, Kirkman E, Reed R, Ausset S, Beckett A, et alTrauma
Haemostasis and Oxygenation Research Network position paper on the role of
hypotensive resuscitation as part of remote damage control resuscitation. J Trauma
Acute Care Surg. 2018; 84: 3–13.

179
6. 3. Haemorrhage and haemorrhagic shock

178

180

PART &: BLOOD, FLUIDS AND ELECTROLYTES
Stick to the ABCDEs!

Keypoints

Part 7: Injuries

Humans are watery creatures, not all of it is within the blood vessels.
Use the 4-2-1 formula to assess the basal metabolic needs. This does not
account for the extra loses such as vomiting, diarrhoea and bleeding, which are
often time impossible to measure exactly and then you must approximate.
First line treatment – balanced crystalloids. Use the one you have available.
Although 0,9% NaCl is not physiological and is not balanced, there are some
situations where one might still use it (such as brain injury, hyperkalaemia or loss
of chloride ions).
When suspecting an electrolyte disorder, try to find previous labs from a patient
to see the trend.
Hypokalaemia is the most common electrolyte disorder. Luckily, it is easier to
supply what is missing then to remove that what is in a surplus.
Hyperkalaemia happens often with chronic kidney failure (and less often from
other causes). It can be life-threatening, proceed carefully. Look at the ECG
changes, protect the heart with calcium if needed, administer insulin (with
glucose, of course) and salbutamol to shift the potassium into the cells. You’ve
just bought the patient enough time to seek expert help and consider/organize
dialysis.
Significant bleeding is a big problem:
— decrease in cardiac output and haemoglobin concentrations decreases oxygen delivery to the tissues,
— losing blood results in losing coagulation factors as well — promotes further
bleeding.
Haemorrhagic shock: the patient is pale, cold, mottled, can be disoriented, agitated, unconscious, usually tachypnoeic and tachycardic.
Be extra careful with paediatric and geriatric patients. The former (once they are
no longer babies) have a big reserve, they will compensate vigorously but once
they stop compensating – cardiac arrest is imminent. On the other side, geriatric
patients tend to decompensate rapidly. Both age groups require extra caution.
When out of the hospital and the suspected blood loss is higher than 15% total
blood volume, try to stop the bleeding, if possible, open two wide-bore IV lines,
administer crystalloids and colloids (6% HES 500-1000 ml max.). If available,
administer other specific blood products per local protocol.
When managing suspected blood loss exceeding 15% of total blood volume outside the hospital, first attempt to control the bleeding if possible. Establish two
wide-bore IV lines, administer crystalloids (adjust the volume to achieve, but not
exceed, the target blood pressure), and consider adding colloids—specifically
6% HES, up to a maximum of 500–1000 mL.
Follow the targeted MAP values for traumatic bleeding while performing fluid
resuscitation!

180—212

182
Part 7: Injuries

Petra 0verko Zinai+, Marinka Oto1an,
NataBa Mavrinac, Mate MateBi+
'. !. TRAUMA ASSESSMENT AND MANAGMENT

'. !. !. INTRODUCTION
Polytrauma, along with other conditions such as acute coronary syndrome and stroke, is a “time-dependent disease”, meaning that the
recognition of life-threatening injuries, initial stabilisation, and definitive care are directly connected with the survival rate, which is referred
to in the literature as the “golden period” (previously known as the
“golden hour”). The specified time starts from the moment of injury
to the moment of definitive treatment in the operating room. When
talking about the pre-hospital management of polytrauma as part of
the golden period, the aim is to spend as less time as possible at the
scene of the accident, ideally 10 minutes, to examine the patient, identify and manage life-threatening conditions, immobilise the patient,
and transport them to the appropriate institution – trauma centre.
When talking about the approach to the polytrauma patient, there
are several different associations that hold courses and provide guidelines for patient care. The most common approaches used in Europe
are the International Trauma Life Support (ITLS) approach, which is
adapted to outpatient conditions, and the European Trauma Course
(ETC) approach as primary hospital trauma care, but the trauma examination remains the same.

183

SCENE SIZE2UP
Assessment of the scene involves taking precautions to identify and
remove all hazards from the scene of the accident before approaching the patient. If it is determined that the place of the accident is not
safe (e.g., risk of electric shock, risk of explosion or fire, risk of building
collapse, unsecured road, etc.), it must be made safe by other emergency services or the victim must be removed from the scene without
jeopardising your own safety or the safety of your team. It is always
necessary to use your own protective equipment due to possible contact with blood or other potentially infectious material. You should also
protect the patient from contact with other people’s body fluids by
changing protective gloves when examining multiple injured persons.
When assessing the scene, we must also assess the mechanism
of injury (MOI), the number of victims, the equipment necessary for
treating the injured, and the need for additional medical assistance. If
it is determined that there are more injured people at the scene, reinforcements should be requested. As a rule, one vehicle and one ambulance team are needed for each severely injured person.
When approaching an injured person, we must assess the mechanism of injury — the way the patient was injured, which is especially
important in considering possible injuries.
'. !. 3. MECHANISM OF INJURY
The mechanism of injury can be generalised when large forces act
on the whole body and life-threatening injuries can be expected, or
focused, when forces act on an isolated region (e.g., a stone falling
on the foot), although these injuries can also be life-threatening (e.g.,
a penetrating wound with a sharp object). A significant mechanism
of injury includes falling out of a vehicle, falling from a height of more
than four and a half meters, overturning a vehicle, colliding with a car
at high speeds, colliding with a pedestrian, and having a motorcycle
accident. When we examine a patient with any of the significant mechanisms of injury, we should always expect more severe injuries that
may not be visible at first glance.
A motor vehicle collision implies three consecutive collisions: a
vehicle collision, a body collision, and an organ collision. Additional
causes of injuries can be secondary and additional collisions — when

185
SCENE SIZE-UP
— Standard Precautions
— Scene Hazards
— Number of Patients
— Need for More Help or Equipment
— Mechanism of Injury

INITIAL ASSESSMENT
— General Impression of the Patient
— Level of Consciousness
— Airway
— Breathing
— Circulation

Mechanism of
Injury?

Generalized or
Unknown MOI

Localized MOI

Rapid Trauma
Survey

Focused exam

Load–and–Go
situation?

ITLS secondary
survey

ITLS ongoing exam

FIGURE !. ITLS trauma patient assessment (retrieved and adapted from
International Trauma

7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

Part 7: Injuries

'. !. 2. MANAGEMENT OF TRAUMA PATIENTS
We use the internationally recognised ITLS algorithm for the proper
survey of injured patients in outpatient emergency medicine (Figure 1):
—
ITLS primary survey — scene size-up, initial assessment, and
rapid trauma survey or focused survey
—
ITLS ongoing exam — monitoring of changes in the patient’s
condition
—
ITLS secondary survey — complete examination and identification of all injuries.
ITLS PRIMARY SURVEY

184

186

TABLE !. Basic mechanisms of injury
The basic mechanisms of injury caused by movement
Blunt injuries

Penetrating injuries

— sudden forward deceleration (collision)
— sudden vertical deceleration (fall)
— energy transfer from blunt objects (impact)

— missiles
— knives
— falls on a fixed object

TABLE 2. Potential injuries depending on the trauma mechanism
MECHANISM OF INJURY

POTENTIAL INJURY

Frontal impact:
— Steering wheel deformity
— Dashboard cracking
— Windscreen deformity

— Cervical spine fracture
— Flail chest
— Myocardial contusion
— Pneumothorax
— Aortic disruption
— Spleen or liver laceration
— Posterior hip dislocation
— Knee dislocation

Lateral impact

— Cervical spine fracture
— Flail chest
— Pneumothorax
— Aortic disruption
— Diaphragmatic rupture
— Laceration of spleen, liver, kidney
— Pelvic fracture

Rear impact

— Cervical spine injury

Pedestrian vs. car

— Head injury
— Abdominal visceral injuries
— Fracture of lower extremities and pelvis
— Spine fracture

'. !. 4. INITIAL ASSESSMENT
The team leader performs the primary ITLS assessment and does not
stop it until it is fully completed, except in cases of cardiopulmonary
arrest, airway obstruction, external bleeding that cannot be stopped,
or new danger at the scene of the accident. When dealing with people
who are in critical condition, the goal is to complete the primary examination within two minutes and stay on the scene for less than ten
minutes. To perform procedures and interventions during an ITLS
assessment, the team leader delegates team members using the “fix
it” tactic. For example, after the doctor checks the airway and cervical spine, the “fix it” procedure may be to place a Schantz collar and
an oxygen mask. One member of the team is positioned above the
injured person’s head and manually limits the mobility of the cervical
spine until the final immobilisation on a long backboard with a strap
and lateral head restraints or in a vacuum mattress.
Before approaching the injured person, the team leader assesses the general impression. The team leader notices major deformities and obvious breathing disorders and determines the risk group
(elderly, children, pregnant women). Impaired state of consciousness,
compromised airway, respiratory or circulatory disorder, and penetrating injuries to the head, neck, body, or extremities proximal to the
elbow or knee indicate a critical patient. If the team leader notices
major external bleeding after stabilising the head and neck with their
hands, they delegate to a team member to stop the bleeding, which
changes the usual priority approach from ABC to C-ABC.
The initial assessment is performed by the team leader using
the ABCDE algorithm. The team leader approaches the injured
person and addresses them only when the team leader has stabilised
with their hands the injured person’s head and neck. The team leader
introduces themselves and asks what happened. Depending on the
patient’s answer, the level of consciousness is quickly assessed using
the AVPU scale.
“A” (alert) means the patient is awake, oriented, and obeys commands. “V” (verbal) means the patient responds to verbal stimuli, is
awake but confused, or unconscious but responds in some way to
verbal stimuli. “P” (pain) means unconscious but responds in some
way to touch or painful stimuli. “U” (unresponsive) means that the
patient does not respond to any stimuli.
If the level of consciousness is “P” or “U”, there is a high risk of
airway compromise.
The stabilisation of the head and neck is taken over by a team
member, and the team leader continues with the examination.
A (AIRWAY):
If the victim responds, it means that the airway is open. If consciousness is impaired, we listen for sound phenomena: snoring indicates
a partial obstruction and requires interventions to ensure airway
patency (initial modified mandibular ejection grip or placement of

187
7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

Part 7: Injuries

unsecured objects move like projectiles at the speed of the vehicle
or the vehicle hits the nearest object or other vehicles collide with it.
Likewise, vehicle safety systems can cause additional injuries to the
abdomen, cervical and lumbar spine, shoulders, and collarbone. By
knowing the principle of injury formation in a particular mechanism,
it is possible to predict the injury to certain organ systems (Table 2).
In the event of a fall, injuries depend on the height of the fall,
the part of the body hit, and the surface on which the body hit.
The severity of a stab wound with a knife depends on the part
of the body that was stabbed (a stab below the fourth intercostal
space can also affect the abdomen), the length of the blade, and the
angle of the stab.

188

B (BREATHING):
It consists of calculating the respiratory rate, observing the symmetry of chest elevation, using the auxiliary respiratory muscles, and
attaching a pulse oximeter. High-flow oxygen (12–15 L/min) should be
delivered via a mask with a tank to each critically injured person. If
the patient is not breathing, it is necessary to provide bag-mask ventilation using the self-expanding balloon with a container (e.g., Ambu
bag). Provide assisted ventilation if the patient breathes inadequately
(with too low frequency or insufficient volumes).
C (CIRCULATION):
It consists of pulse assessment (rate, rhythm, strenght), skin (temperature, colour, dryness/sweating), and capillary refill time. In the
early stage of shock, the skin is pale, cold, and sweaty, the pulse is
poorly palpable and rapid, and the capillary refill time is prolonged.
We check again to see if there is any visible external bleeding. On top
of that, we try to obtain IV access. However, establishing IV access
must not delay critical interventions and emergency transport of a vitally endangered injured person.
D (DISABILITY):
We assess the patient’s state of consciousness as part of the initial
assessment using the AVPU scale. A more detailed neurological examination, with the assessment of the state of consciousness using
the Glasgow Coma Scale and estimation of pupil size, symmetry, and
reactivity to light, is performed at the end of the primary ITLS assessment before entering the vehicle if the victim has a disturbed state of
consciousness. If the victim is fully conscious, we can postpone and
perform the detailed neurological examination during the secondary
survey. If the injured person has an impaired state of consciousness
or diabetes, it is necessary to measure their blood glucose level.
E (EXPOSURE):
By evaluating exposure to environmental factors, we identify objects
found in the immediate environment (needles in intravenous drug
addicts, pills in suspected overdoses) or factors related to the victim
(stab wounds, body temperature, etc.).
SAMPLE
Since it is not uncommon for an injured person to lose consciousness
before arriving at the hospital, the emergency medical service team is
the only one that has the opportunity to obtain anamnestic data. If the

injured person is already unconscious during the primary examination, it is necessary to take a heteroanamnesis from eyewitnesses or
family members.
S
A
M
P
L
E

symptoms
allergies
medications
past medical history
last oral intake
events preceding the incident

'. !. %. RAPID TRAUMA SURVEY
Rapid trauma survey is a systematic examination of the injured
person by body regions to determine the resulting injuries and their
extent (Figure 2).
It begins after the initial ABCDE assessment is completed. It is
performed in patients with a generalised mechanism of injury or if
any part of the initial assessment is abnormal. In patients with isolated or minor trauma, instead of a quick trauma survey, only a targeted
physical examination of the injured body part is required.
A rapid trauma survey is performed by assessing region by
region (head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, extremities, and finally
the back). We first assess each region by inspection and then by palpation (we also perform auscultation of the chest and, if necessary,
percussion), and only then do we move on to the next region (“from
head to toe”).
Inspection enables us to detect visible injuries, hematomas,
bleeding, and deformities. The neck is specially inspected for jugular
venous distention (if present, it may indicate tension pneumothorax
or pericardial tamponade). In chest examination, we should notice
open wounds (suspected open pneumothorax) and unstable segments (flail chest), whereas the mark of a seat belt on the abdomen
indicates a high probability of injury to the abdominal organs and the
possibility of developing shock.
By examining the extremities, we can notice open fractures. We
never remove foreign bodies (except in the case when they cause
airway obstruction or are located in the cheek area), but we stabilise
them in the found position. Do not return abdominal protrusions to
the abdominal cavity but cover them with sterile gauze abundantly
soaked in isotonic saline solution and covered with an impermeable
foil. The amputated parts are placed in a dry bag, which is then immersed in another bag containing ice and water. The amputated part
must not come into contact with water or into direct contact with
ice. Palpation reveals sensitivity, instability, and crepitation which
indicate a possible fracture. After palpation of the posterior parts of
the body inaccessible to inspection, it is necessary to determine the
presence of blood on the gloves. During the palpation of the cervical

189
7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

Part 7: Injuries

an oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal tube), gurgling indicates liquid
contents in the oral cavity and requires aspiration. The see-saw phenomenon (a non-synchronised movement of the chest and abdomen
during inhalation) during inspiration and vice versa during expiration)
is a sign of complete airway obstruction.

191

HEAD
INSPECTION — visible injuries, haematoma, deformity
PALPATION — tenderness, crepitations, instability

NECK
INSPECTION - visible injuries, neck vein distention
PALPATION - tenderness, tracheal deviation,
subcutaneous emphysema
CERVICAL SPINE IMMOBILISATION

CHEST
INSPECTION — visible injuries, unstable segment,
open wound
PALPATION — tenderness, crepitations, instability
AUSCULTATION of breathing and heart sounds
PERCUSSION in the case of unequal auscultatory findings

ABDOMEN
INSPECTION — injuries, traces of a seat belt
PALPATION — tenderness, rigidity, distension

PELVIS
INSPECTION — injuries, deformity
PALPATION — tenderness, crepitations, instability
PELVIC SPLINT

EXTREMITIES
INSPECTION — visible injuries, deformity
PALPATION — tenderness, crepitations, instability,
bleeding distal pulses, motor function, and sensation (PMS)

POSTERIOR
INSPECTION — visible injuries
PALPATION — tenderness, crepitations, instability
Spinal motion restriction — LONG SPINE BACKBOARD

FIGURE 2. Rapid trauma survey

7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

Part 7: Injuries

spine (and later when examining the entire spine), it is necessary
to identify pain or deformities in the spinous processes, as well as
paravertebral muscle tension.
We palpate the chest with the “click-clack” technique.
Spread the palms horizontally above and below the breast, first on
one side of the chest (e.g., left hemithorax). Press with one hand
and then with the other and ask the injured person if they are in
pain and palpate for crepitations or instability. Repeat the same
with the other side of the chest.
Palpate the abdomen in four quadrants. If the patient is in
pain, we consider that there is an injury to the intra-abdominal
organs with the threatening risk of shock. Palpate the pelvis by
pressing on the symphysis and with the movement of closing the
book we embrace both iliac cristae with our palms and squeeze
inwards. If the pelvis is already painful when pressing on the
symphysis or we feel the instability of the pelvic ring, we do not
examine the pelvis further. In the case of an unstable pelvis, it is
necessary to install a pelvic splint.
When palpating the extremities, we examine individual segments. First one leg (upper leg, lower leg, sensation, and motor
function), then the other leg, then one arm (upper arm, forearm,
sensation, motor function), and finally the other arm. In each
segment, we first determine instability (which is a definite sign of
fracture) if there are no obvious deformities (which is also a definite
sign of fracture). We fixate the joint against the base by pressing
from above (knee or elbow), and with the other hand we reach
under the upper end of the femur or humerus and by lifting that
part, we determine whether the bone is unstable. We also examine
the distal parts of the extremities (with one hand we squeeze the
knee or elbow against the ground, and with the other hand we lift
the distal part of the lower leg or forearm). After assessing the instability, we put our hand under a certain segment and pass along
the entire length by palpating possible crepitations. We then ask
the injured person if they are in pain, and look at the glove to see if
there are any traces of blood. If there are signs of limb fracture, we
must assess the presence of pulsations below the fracture site.
The assessment of a possible spinal injury includes the assessment of motor function and sensation in the hands and feet.
If the injured person has an altered state of consciousness but
still reacts to painful stimuli, then during palpation we observe the
injured person’s face and determine the pain level according to
their grimace.
Among other methods of examination, we auscultate the
chest at two points in the midaxillary line on both sides of the
chest and listen to breathing sounds. If breath sounds are unequal,
by percussion in four places we identify if the chest is hyperresonant (pneumothorax) or dull (haemothorax). We also auscultate the
heart sounds (are they still normal or have they become muffled).

RAPID TRAUMA SURVEY

190

192
Part 7: Injuries

We examine the injured person’s back after turning them on the
side using the so-called log roll technique. In the case of contraindications for turning on the side (unstable pelvis, bilateral femoral fracture,
foreign body in the abdomen or chest, or clear signs of a spinal injury –
abnormality of sensation or motor function of the extremities, deformity and pain of the cervical spine), the back is examined after lifting the
patient with a scoop stretcher (Figure 3).
The assessment should be carried out as described, without
skipping steps, so that injuries can be detected and addressed with
a systematic approach. In patients at risk of developing shock or with
signs of developed shock, it is necessary to obtain two large-bore IV
lines and start with fluid replacement. In the case of suspected internal
bleeding (intra-abdominal, haemothorax), the goal is to achieve a systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg.
Excessive fluid replacement can increase blood pressure and
thus worsen bleeding (the formed clot dislodges, and the pressure at
the bleeding site is higher), dilution of clotting factors occurs, and cold
fluid additionally contributes to coagulation disorder. When possible,
remove the patient’s clothes for proper examination. It should always
be assumed that an injured patient with a significant mechanism of
injury may also have a spinal injury.
Contraindications for turning on the side are unstable pelvis, bilateral femoral fracture, foreign body in the abdomen or chest, or
clear signs of a spinal injury.
'. !. &. IMMOBILISATION
'. !. &. !. CERVICAL SPINE IMMOBILISATION WITH A CERVICAL
COLLAR
Immobilisation of the spine begins with manual stabilisation by placing
the patient’s head between the rescuer’s two hands and continues with
the placement of a cervical collar and other immobilisation equipment.
The cervical collar supports the head and neck and maintains a
neutral position of the cervical spine. However, spinal immobilisation
is not complete until the patient is secured on a long backboard with
lateral head stabilisers.
Before installing the collar, it is necessary to examine the entire
neck because after its installation, inspection and palpation of that
area are difficult. It is necessary to determine the correct size of the
collar for cervical spine immobilisation by measuring the distance
between the point where the trapezius muscle touches the side of the
neck and the point where the imaginary line starting from the chin (perpendicular to the floor for a lying patient, parallel for a sitting patient)
intersects the side of the neck. The second point is usually located one
to two centimetres below the angle of the mandible. The measurement

FIGURE 3. Scoop stretcher

194
Part 7: Injuries

is expressed by the number of fingers that fit between these two points,
and the measured distance is transferred to the plastic part of the collar
after which the width is adjusted. With the victim lying down, the first
step is to place the back of the collar under the head and neck, and then
the collar is placed on the front of the neck under the chin. If the injured
person is sitting, we first place the collar on the front of the neck.
'. !. &. 2. SPINAL IMMOBILISATION WITH A LONG BACKBOARD
— LOG ROLL
To place the patient on a long backboard and completely immobilise the
spine, we need the following: a cervical collar, a long backboard, lateral
stabilisers for the head and neck, two adhesive headbands, straps, and
three or four people (Figure 5).
Manual stabilisation of the head and neck is the fastest way to
protect the spine until an appropriate immobilisation device is selected.
If the patient is conscious, we should explain the spinal immobilisation
procedure to them and ask for their cooperation. By placing a cervical
spine immobilisation collar, we keep the injured person’s head and neck
in a neutral position while the spine is being immobilised. We still use
our hands to stabilise the head and neck. The long backboard should
be positioned parallel to the patient. While one team member maintains
in-line manual stabilisation, another supports the shoulder and hips, and
the third supports the hips and lower extremities. A team member on
the patient’s head directs the other team members to log roll the patient
as a unit onto the side toward the emergency care providers. While the
injured person is on their side, the back and buttocks are examined for
possible injuries.
The team member holding the injured person’s shoulder must not
move it, as this would endanger the stability of the spine, and performs
the back examination with their other (“lower”) hand. The fourth person,
if there is one, places a long backboard for immobilisation parallel to the
patient’s body. The patient is then log rolled on the long backboard back
to the supine position.
The injured person needs to be secured on the immobilisation
board using straps. First, place the upper horizontal strap under the
arms, above the breasts. Then place the second horizontal strap across
the pelvis, the third strap above the knees (in the case of a femur fracture, place it below the knees), and with the fourth strap, form an “8”
around the feet. Finally, we install the head motion-restriction device –
lateral stabilisers for the head and neck. It is important to always place
the straps and lateral stabilisers in this order, otherwise, in the event of
vomiting and turning the patient on the long backboard onto the side,
the patient could slide off the board and the spine would become unstable. Another option for immobilisation is a vacuum mattress, which is
increasingly recommended by professional associations, especially for
longer transports.

FIGURE 4. Semi-rigid Schanz collar (down) and collar placed for cervical spine immobilisation (up)

Part 7: Injuries

After the exclusion of the above, the senior doctor, the team
leader, gathers information about the patient’s status and the event.
A rapid trauma survey and an ultrasound examination following the
FAST protocol are performed, and, depending on the clinical status, a
decision is made on the necessary laboratory and radiological tests
and removal of the immobilisation equipment.
'. !. 3. SPECIFIC INJURIES

FIGURE %. Immobilisation equipment

'. !. 3. !. CHEST INJURIES
Thoracic bones protect most of the vital organs in the chest: lungs,
heart, large blood vessels, liver, spleen, transverse colon, and spinal
cord. Trauma can cause significant disruptions in each of these systems that can be life-threatening if not quickly identified and treated.
According to the mechanism of injury chest injuries are divided into
blunt or closed and open or penetrating. Closed ones are usually
caused by traffic accidents, falls from heights, being buried, or a
blunt blow to the chest. Open injuries are most often caused by stab
wounds or gunshot wounds. A foreign body should not be removed
from the wound, but it should be stabilised.
Life-threatening injuries should be identified during the primary
ITLS survey. Difficulty breathing and chest pain are the main signs of
chest injuries.
Tenderness, instability, and crepitations can be determined by
palpation. Auscultation checks whether breath sounds are present
and symmetrical. Multiple rib fractures with or without the formation
of an unstable segment can lead to hypoxia due to disorders of respiratory mechanics and lung contusion. It is important to constantly monitor the patient and use pulse oximetry and capnography to
detect hypoxia or hypoventilation in time. If necessary, apply oxygen
therapy, constantly monitor the heart rhythm, and establish intravenous access for possible therapy.
Secondary examination and inspection will provide information on other possible life-threatening injuries, such as pulmonary

197
7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

'. !. '. ETC APPROACH TO TRAUMA PATIENTS
The first European Trauma Course was held in 2002. and was developed through a collaboration of the main European medical associations such as anaesthesiology, traumatology, and emergency
medicine associations. It was developed in response to the need for a
multidisciplinary9team focused on9trauma approach and initial care in
the hospital emergency department.
Upon the patient’s arrival at the emergency hospital department
begin with a quick assessment, the so-called 5-second round:
—
Are there signs of airway obstruction?
—
Is there massive external bleeding visible?
—
Are there signs of arrest?

196

198

space in the front or midaxillary line, where the thoracic wall is thinner,
and, according to some research, the percentage of success is, therefore, higher than with the classic approach.
Definitive therapy for tension pneumothorax includes placement
of thoracic drainage in hospital conditions.

TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX
Pneumothorax is the accumulation of air in the potential space between the visceral and parietal pleura, resulting in complete lung
collapse. Tension pneumothorax is a progressive accumulation of air
in the pleural space that continuously accumulates without exiting,
which results in the “one-way valve” phenomenon and further accumulation of air. Intra-thoracic pressure on the affected side increases,
displacing the heart and trachea to the opposite side and collapsing
the superior and inferior vena cava, thus occluding venous return
to the heart. This leads to a drop in cardiac output and obstructive
shock. If rapid intervention is not performed, respiratory and cardiac
arrests occur within a few minutes.

OPEN PNEUMOTHORAX
Open pneumothorax is an accumulation of air in the potential space
between the visceral and parietal pleura due to an open chest wound. It
occurs as a result of penetrating chest trauma or an open rib fracture. If
the chest wound is greater than two-thirds the diameter of the trachea,
air will dominantly enter through the wound during inspiration.
Open pneumothorax must be covered with an occlusive dressing
that is attached to the skin on three sides with adhesive tape so that
one corner remains free. This forms a “flutter valve”, which enables
air to be expelled through the wound during exhalation but prevents
“suction” during inhalation.

AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
TENSION PREUMOTHORAX
OPEN PREUMOTHORAX
MASSIVE HAEMOTHORAX
FAIL CHEST
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
FIGURE &. Life-threatening conditions in chest injuries that are important to
recognize during primary survey

Classic signs of tension pneumothorax include dyspnoea,
tachypnoea, possibly tracheal deviation, distended jugular veins
(caution during hypovolaemic shock), overexpansion of that part of
the chest with minimal respiratory movements, auscultatory absent
or decreased breath sounds on the affected side, and hyperresonant
sound during percussion (on the affected side). Needle decompression is a temporary but life-saving method.
Needle thoracocentesis is performed by inserting a needle with
the widest possible calibre (14 or 16 Fr, or < 10 G) with a catheter into
the pleural space through the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line along the upper edge of the lower rib. The sound of hissing
air coming out under high pressure from the pleural space confirms
the diagnosis. A possible approach is the fourth and fifth intercostal

MASSIVE HAEMOTHORAX
Massive haemothorax can result from blunt or penetrating trauma, and
the source of bleeding can be in the lungs, major vessels, intercostal
vessels, or even the heart. Massive haemothorax is defined by the
presence of at least 1,500 mL of blood loss into the pleural space of the
thoracic cavity. Clinical signs of shock may be apparent. The indications for thoracotomy are the following:
— blood loss > 1,500 mL or 1/3 blood volume
— blood loss > 200 mL/h (3 mL/kg/h) over 2–4 hours.
FLAIL CHEST
Flail chest is an emergency condition resulting from a fracture of three
or more adjacent ribs in two or more sites, causing chest wall instability
and paradoxical movement of the “flail segment” in a spontaneously
breathing patient. A flail segment no longer moves in continuity with
the rest of the chest and retracts during inspiration and protrudes
during expiration.
It occurs as a result of blunt thoracic trauma in traffic accidents,
violence, and falls. The most significant complication and accompanying pathophysiology is lung contusion, respiratory insufficiency, lung
atelectasis, and pneumothorax.
Management includes patient stabilisation, so adequate analgaesia, endotracheal intubation, and assisted ventilation are often required.
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Pericardial tamponade often occurs as a result of penetrating chest
injuries. If blood accumulates quickly, even small amounts can cause
tamponade because the pericardium cannot stretch fast enough to
accommodate it. The ventricles get compressed, making the heart
less able to refill, and cardiac output decreases. This leads to the

199
7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

Part 7: Injuries

contusion, myocardial contusion, traumatic diaphragmatic rupture,
and tracheobronchial tree disorders. A sternal fracture can be suspected by palpation of the sternum, and it is caused by blunt trauma
to the anterior chest wall. A simple rib fracture is one of the most
common chest injuries.

Part 7: Injuries

development of obstructive shock. Cardiac tamponade is characterised
by Beck’s triad, which includes hypotension, systemic venous stasis
(jugular vein distention), and muffled tones during heart auscultation.
Accelerated heart rate, tachypnoea, and paradoxical pulse may also
appear. It should be emphasised that without the help of ultrasound, it is
very difficult to clinically distinguish between tension pneumothorax and
cardiac tamponade during the primary survey.
Treatment of tamponade includes emergency pericardiocentesis
with drain age, usually performed by an experienced person.
DIAPHRAGMATIC RUPTURE
Diaphragmatic rupture caused by blunt trauma is not a common injury,
but about 5% of polytrauma patients have this injury. Traffic accidents
are the main cause of traumatic diaphragmatic ruptures. In many cases,
the diaphragmatic rupture is initially not recognised due to severe multiple injuries. Most often, the diaphragm ruptures on the left side. Diaphragmatic injuries can occur as a result of blunt or penetrating trauma
(especially on the left side). Blunt injury causes lacerations that can lead
to herniation of abdominal structures into the thoracic cavity. Penetrating injuries can cause small perforations that may present as herniations
years later. Diaphragm injuries should be suspected in severe blunt
chest trauma, especially if compressive or rapid deceleration forces are
involved.
'. !. 3. 2. ABDOMINAL INJURIES
Abdominal trauma is life-threatening due to the high possibility of haemorrhagic shock. Abdominal trauma is very difficult to assess even in
hospital conditions, therefore, it is very important to obtain as much
information as possible on the mechanism of injury in pre-hospital conditions and then consider an intra-abdominal injury. Minimising the time
spent in the field and fast transport increases the chances of survival.
According to the mechanism of occurrence, abdominal trauma can be
divided into blunt or penetrating injuries. Signs and symptoms include
abdominal pain, tenderness, abdominal wall tension, and bruising of the
outer abdominal wall. In the case of a blunt abdominal injury, it is very
important to look for external signs of injury such as skin abrasions, hematomas, and seat belt marks. A horizontal belt track is a clinical sign
that carries a 30% risk of mesenteric and intestinal injury.
The abdomen is palpated in four quadrants, and the pelvis and
lower ribs should be examined for signs of fracture. In many patients
subsequently diagnosed with an intra-abdominal injury, there are no
clear signs of such an injury on the initial ITLS examination, so it is very
important to obtain information about the mechanism of injury. For
larger open injuries, it is extremely important not to attempt to return the
organs to the abdominal cavity. Instead, cover them with warm gauze
moistened with saline or water. Patient management includes obtaining several venous accesses, administering prescribed analgaesics,

constantly monitoring the patient, and observing their condition until
arrival at the hospital.

201

BLUNT ABDOMINAL INJURIES
Blunt abdominal injuries are caused by the blunt action of an external
force and are a diagnostic challenge due to the very frequent absence
of visible signs on the body surface. They are usually caused by traffic
accidents, falls from a height, bicycle handlebar injuries, sports injuries, and intentional injuries.
Intra-abdominal bleeding, hollow organ injury, and retroperitoneal injury may occur in the case of a blunt abdominal injury.
The most common causes of intra-abdominal bleeding are
ruptured spleen, liver, and, less often, mesenteric blood vessels. The
symptoms are the same as in hypovolaemic shock, with pain sensitivity and distension. Rupture of the spleen is most often associated with
a fracture of the lower ribs.
The consequence of rupture of the initial jejunum or terminal
ileum is peritonitis. Rupture occurs due to midabdominal compression between the external force and the spine. The main symptoms
are pain, nausea, and hard stomach. Vomiting and abdominal distention occur in the case of intestinal paresis. In the case of abdominal
contusion, rupture most often occurs in the less mobile part of the
intestines, such as the jejunum, and terminal ileum. Duodenal rupture
usually occurs if the abdominal muscles are relaxed at the time of abdominal contusion. The spleen is the most frequently injured organ of
the abdominal region during trauma and the second most frequently
injured organ in children.
Retroperitoneal haematoma is most often the result of a kidney
rupture, which can be combined on the left side with a ruptured
spleen. In the retroperitoneal space, the pancreas and duodenum can
be injured as a result of compression between the external force and
the spine. Pancreatic injury can manifest as traumatic pancreatitis,
which is the most common form of pancreatic injury.

7. 1. Trauma assessment and managment

200

PENETRATING ABDOMINAL INJURIES
Penetrating injuries are mostly caused by stabbing or firearms. These
injuries cause damage to the blood vessels of the abdominal wall, but
injuries to the internal abdominal organs (liver, spleen, stomach, intestines, and mesentery) can also occur. Sometimes a part of the intestinal coil protrudes through the opening on the abdominal wall, which
is a definite sign of a penetrating injury. If the wound is caused by a
projectile, then a penetrating abdominal injury could result from an
entry wound at almost any part of the body. In the case of larger open
injuries, it is extremely important not to attempt to return the organs to
the abdominal cavity. Instead, cover them with warm gauze moistened
with saline or water.

202
Part 7: Injuries

'. !. 4. PELVIC INJURIES
Pelvic injuries are complex because they are mostly caused by
trauma with high energy transfer (traffic accidents, falls from a greater height...) and can be accompanied by profuse bleeding and rapid
development of haemorrhagic shock. In most cases, a pelvic fracture
appears associated with injuries to other body regions (intra-thoracic
and intra-abdominal injuries). In the case of a pelvic fracture, we can
expect profuse bleeding and the rapid development of circulatory
shock. Stabilisation of the pelvis is performed with a pelvic splint.
Pelvic stabilisation is an important and simple intervention in
the treatment of severe pelvic trauma. It has four main goals:
—
preventing further tissue damage caused by possible pathological movement of the fractured pelvic bones
—
reducing the volume of the pelvis
—
minimising bleeding from injured bony structures and soft
tissue reducing the patient’s pain.
When do we need to use a pelvic splint?
— in a haemodynamically unstable patient with a mechanically
unstable pelvis
— in a haemodynamically unstable patient with a suspected
pelvic fracture
— in a haemodynamically stable patient with a mechanically un
stable pelvis.

FIGURE %. Illustration of the placement of the pelvic splint. It is important to check the 4 Ps
before and after immobilisation: pain, pockets, penis, and pulse. The splint is placed at the
level of the greater trochanters. The buckle ensures the proper clamping force of the splint,
but it must not be too tight. Splint is X-ray transparent, can be used in MRI, and is intended
for multiple uses.

SOURCES
1.
Alson RL, Han KH, Campbell JE. International Trauma Life Support for Emergency
Care Providers. 9th ed. Pearson; 2021.
2.
Thies KV, Mountain A, Goode P. The European Trauma Course Manual. 4th ed. Market
Frayton, European Trauma Course Organisation; 2023.
3.
American College of Surgeons – Committee on Trauma. ATLS Advanced Trauma Life
Support - Student Course Manual. 10th ed. American College of Surgeons; 2018.

204

'. 2. BURNS

Janja Tar1ukovi+

Part 7: Injuries

'. 2. !. INTRODUCTION
Most physicians who work in emergency medical services will encounter a patient with large burns, a challenging and life-threatening
injury. The initial management of these patients will make a difference
between good and poor outcomes. Epidemiology data suggest that
burns are more common in men than women, with flame and scald as
the most common causes. Moreover, children under 5 years of age are
five times more likely to be injured than adults. Approximately 10% of
burned patients will need hospital admission, and 10–15% of hospitalised patients will need to be treated in burn centres. The incidence of
severe burns in Europe is 0.2–2.9/10,000.
RISK FACTORS FOR DEVELOPING SEVERE COMPLICATIONS AND
POOR OUTCOMES INCLUDE:
—
second-degree burns covering more than 10% of total body
surface area (TBSA) in patients under 10 and over 50 years of age
—
second-degree burns covering more than 20% TBSA
—
third-degree burns covering more than 5% TBSA
—
burns that involve the face, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum, and/
or major joints
—
chemical burns (management includes contacting the Poison
Control Centre, for Croatia available at +38512348342)
—
electrical burns (including lightening injuries)
—
burns associated with other trauma injuries
—
patient’s preexisting medical condition that has implications
on wound healing and/or burn management (e.g., chronic heart
failure, diabetes, immunosuppression, pregnancy).

205

206

'. 2. 2. INITIAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT:
ABCDE ? SAMPLE
—
Assess the safety of the patient and the rescuer(s), e.g., consider
potential hazards due to electricity, gas, traffic, etc.
—
If ongoing, stop the burning process.
—
Every burned patient should also be managed as a trauma
patient due to common concomitant injuries such as head
trauma due to suffocation and loss of consciousness, escaping
from fire by jumping through a window, etc.
—
Check if the patient responds to stimuli:
—
If not, call for help, open the airway, and check for breathing
sounds and pulse for 10 seconds (follow the advanced life
support algorithm).
—
If the patient is alive, proceed with ABCDEF:
A (AIRWAY) / B (BREATHING) / CERVICAL SPINE CONTROL:
—
Check the airway patency and open the airway in the case of
partial or complete obstruction (apply the cervical spine control
in suspected trauma).
—
Evaluate breathing (“look, listen, and feel” approach: respiratory
rate and effort, breath and added sounds, symmetry of chest
movement, check for subcutaneous emphysema, tracheal deviation, jugular vein dilation, cyanosis), and use pulse oximetry.
—
Apply high-flow oxygen therapy through a non-rebreathing reservoir mask.
—
If the patient has deep burns to the lower face and/or neck,
burned nasal hair, blisters, or oedema of the lip and/or tongue,
and if the fire was in a closed room, a direct and thorough inspection of the oropharynx is needed, preferably by a physician
experienced in airway management.
—
Hoarseness, carbonaceous sputum, hypoxia, stridor, wheezing,
signs of respiratory distress, and/or use of accessory muscles
indicate inhalation injury of the airway and/or lungs, and most
experts advocate for emergency tracheal intubation with a
cuffed endotracheal tube (ETT). Prepare a selection of ETT sizes
as smaller size might be needed due to airway oedema and
secure the ETT position thoroughly as the intubation might be
impossible once the oedema fully develops.
—
Mind that signs and symptoms of airway oedema might become
apparent only after the fluid resuscitation is started, e.g., during
the transport of the patient to the hospital.
—
Check for signs of carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning.

C (CIRCULATION):
Every burn injury larger than 10% of TBSA in children or 15% of
TBSA in adults requires meticulous intravenous fluid resuscitation
to prevent the development of hypovolaemic shock!
—
Check for heart rate, blood pressure, capillary refill time, skin
colour, and (hourly) urine output. Monitor the dynamics every
3–5 minutes.
—
Place two large bore intravenous cannulas (* 18 G, “green, grey,
or orange”), preferably at sites that are not burned, and secure
them well.
—
If this is not possible, establish intraosseous access.
—
Development of hypovolaemic shock takes time: if the burned
patient has low blood pressure immediately after the injury,
search for other causes of hypotension (such as bleeding).
—
Place continuous ECG monitoring, especially in the case of
electrical injury or hypothermia.
—
Check for peripheral pulses on all extremities due to the risk of
developing compartment syndrome, especially in the case of
circumferential burns.
—
Place a urinary catheter to monitor hourly urine output (target
value: > 1 mL/kg/h in adults, > 2 mL/kg/h in children).
—
After finishing the initial assessment, apply analgaesia: e.g.,
morphine 4–6 mg IV, add 1–2 mg IV every 10 minutes until an
adequate level of analgaesia is achieved (pain activates the
sympathetic nervous system and releases catecholamines,
which may intensify skin hypoperfusion and depth of burns).
D (DISABILITY):
—
Check for blood glucose level, AVPU/GCS, reactivity, and symmetry of the pupils. Put special emphasis on toxicological
examinations in the case of suspected carbon monoxide or
cyanide poisoning.
E (EXPOSURE/ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL):
—
Consider cooling the burned sites with clean and cold water, at
an approximate temperature of 12–15 °C (not colder than that),
for 2–3 minutes for the theoretical possibility of limiting the
thermal injury, reducing oedema, and relieving pain. Note that
cooling may cause hypothermia.
—
Irrigate chemical injuries.
—
Wet and dirty clothes should be removed, but do not pull burnt
clothing that is stuck to the skin. Remove all jewellery.
—
Estimate the percentage of the burned TBSA using the “rule of
nines” (Figure 1).
—
If the burns are patchy, the TBSA can be estimated by approximating the area of the patient’s hand, in which case the patient’s hand represents approximately 1% of their TBSA.
—
Burned sites should be covered with sterile gauze soaked in

207
7. 2. Burns

Part 7: Injuries

Patients with one or more of the mentioned criteria will benefit
from being managed in specialised burn units. The mortality rate
is directly affected by burned TBSA, while the functional outcome
depends on the depth and location of the burn injury.

208

—

209

ADULT
4.%%

4.%%

!3%
4.%%

F (EARLY FLUID THERAPY):
—
In adult patients with burns covering more than 20% of TBSA,
start with 500 mL of warmed intravenous fluid during the first
hour after the injury.
—
In children with burns covering more than 10% of TBSA, start
with 50–100 mL of warmed intravenous fluid, depending on the
child’s body weight.
—
Mark the vials/packages so that you are aware of the exact
volume of applied intravenous fluids (excessive fluid resuscitation can exaggerate the extracellular space oedema, worsening
the airway oedema and/or decreasing skin perfusion with the
resultant delay of burn wound healing).
—
Intravenous fluid: balanced crystalloid solution, ideally Ringer
lactate or Ringer acetate, prewarmed at body temperature.
—
Once hospitalised, burns should be assessed and managed by
the surgeon, and intravenous fluid balance during the first 24
hours should be calculated using the Parkland formula

4.%%

4%

4%

4%

INFANT

'%

4%

'%

Inform the hospital that you are arriving with a burned patient, as
these injuries are quite specific, high in resource demands, and
require the expertise of multiple specialists.

!3%
4.%%

4.%%
!3%

4.%%

4.%%

4.%%
2.%% 2.%%
'%

!3%

!3%

FIGURE !.

4%

!3%
4.%%

4.%%

4%

CHILD

2–4 mL 7 the percentage of the burned TBSA 7 body weight

—

!3%

4.%%

4.%%

The first half of the calculated volume should be administered
during the first 8 hours, and the other half over the next 16 hours.

7. 2. Burns

Part 7: Injuries

—

sterile saline or commercially available materials for burn coverage. Do not use ointments, powders, or creams.
Watch for hypothermia (with a core body temperature < 35 °C):
although it is rarely present on initial examination, its incidence
increases to 35% when burned TBSA is > 70% and can lead to
increased fluid requirements, coagulopathy, depressed cardiac
function, arrhythmia, respiratory depression, impaired oxygen
delivery, acidosis, and increased mortality. Hence, once the
patient is fully assessed, cover them with a clean blanket, use
warmed intravenous fluids, and warm the vehicle for transport.
Check when the patient last received tetanus immunisation.

!3%

!3%

!3%

4.%%

'%
'%

Estimation of the percentage of the burned TBSA (retrieved from https://uscrow.
org/2014/07/26/burn-treatment-shtf/burn-treatment-rule-of-nines/)

'%

210
Part 7: Injuries

SOURCES
1.
Alson RL, Han KH, Campbell JE. International Trauma Life Support for Emergency Care
Providers. 9th ed. Pearson; 2021.
2.
Tintinalli JE, O. John Ma, Yealy D, Meckler GD, J. Stephan Stapczynski, Cline DM, Thomas
SH. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide. 9th ed. New York:
McGraw Hill Education; 2020.
3.
Guttormsen AB, Berger MM, Sjoberg F, Heisterkamp H. Burns Injury. 1st ed. European
Society of Intensive Care Medicine – Patient-Centered Acute Care Training; 2012.
4.
Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ. Textbook of Critical Care. 8th ed. Elsevier; 2023.

212

PART ': INJURIES

Keypoints

Trauma patients — protocol is modified to enhance effective management. Learn
the algorithm, do additional courses to improve knowledge and performance.
Do the ABCs.
Look at the scene, it might be dangerous and/or give hints to possible injuries.
If you see significant bleeding – try to stop it as soon as possible (it usually means
to apply pressure to the wound).
Do the rapid trauma survey whenever possible.
Immobilize the patient properly, do not take lightly this part of the management.
If a patient is burned, make sure to know the mechanism. Underlying injuries
must be considered. Also, not all burns carry the same risks (anatomically, chemically…).
Airway/lung burns – might result in complete airway closure and/or pulmonary
oedema. Intubation often necessary as soon as possible, if not trained, administer oxygen, and get to the trained personnel.
Calculate TBSA, calculate the Parkland formula if you have time. Open an IV line
(preferably on an area of untouched skin), begin with fluid resuscitation, and
administer adequate analgesia.

